Advertisement
By MIKE McINTIRE, JIM RUTENBERG and MAGGIE HABERMANAPRIL 10, 2018

During the presidential campaign, Michael D. Cohen got a Google alert for a breaking story: “Russian President Vladimir Putin Praises Donald Trump as ‘Talented’ and ‘Very Colorful.’”
For most American politicians, that article in December 2015 would hardly have been welcome news. But Mr. Cohen, whose role as personal lawyer and fixer for President Trump has been firmly rooted in the transactional world of his boss, saw opportunity. He emailed an old friend who had been talking about seeking Kremlin support to build a Trump Tower in Moscow, and sent him the article.
“Now is the time,” Mr. Cohen wrote. “Call me.”
Mr. Cohen’s efforts put him under scrutiny in the Trump-Russia inquiries and hinted at the somewhat murky space he occupied in the Trump Organization, where his precise duties were unclear. Since then, a series of disclosures have revealed the unusual range of Mr. Cohen’s portfolio.
Agents at the Federal Bureau of Investigation raided his office and hotel room on Monday, seeking records related to payments made shortly before the 2016 election to two women who claimed to have had sexual encounters with Mr. Trump. The investigation poses a legal threat to Mr. Cohen — and possibly his client. Few people closer to Mr. Trump have more knowledge of what the president has been involved with over the years.
Advertisement
“Michael Cohen would lay his life down for Donald Trump,” said Hank Sheinkopf, a veteran New York political strategist who knows both men. “He is the ultimate Trump loyalist.”
Advertisement
Mr. Trump values few things more than loyalty, but secrecy is one of them. For years, to keep the circle of people involved as small as possible, he chose to have Mr. Cohen serve as his legal attack dog from a perch inside Trump Tower in Manhattan instead of having outside counsel deal with his problems, according to two people familiar with their relationship.
In private, Mr. Cohen has compared himself to Tom Hagen, the smooth consigliere to the mafia family in the movie “The Godfather.” His detractors have used other descriptions, with one longtime Trump associate saying that the words “finesse” and Mr. Cohen have rarely been yoked together in a sentence.
If nothing else, the federal investigation, which has also drawn in a tabloid company friendly to Mr. Trump, has cast a harsh light on a partnership that, until recently, at least, worked out well for both Mr. Cohen and Mr. Trump. Mr. Cohen, who met Mr. Trump nearly two decades ago when he bought units in several Trump buildings in New York, later played the role of point man and adviser on some of Mr. Trump’s efforts to expand his brand internationally.
Mr. Cohen also became his boss’s go-to guy for cleaning up messes, from local zoning disputes to negative stories. The lawyer seemed to relish his reputation as Mr. Trump’s “pit bull” and embraced an aggressive — some say bullying — approach to solving problems.
Though Mr. Cohen has been sidelined from the Trump inner circle since the election — he never got a senior administration job, which people who know him say he expected — he has remained devoted to the president. On Twitter, he regularly speaks up on his behalf and assails critics. On Sunday, the day before the F.B.I. raid on his office, Mr. Cohen posted a quote about the importance of loyalty, adding: “I will always protect our @POTUS.”
One such attempt at protection was his effort in July 2015 to quash a Daily Beast article about an old complaint that Mr. Trump’s first wife, Ivana, had made during their divorce, in which she claimed marital rape. She later withdrew the allegation. Mr. Cohen told a reporter for the website that marital rape was not legally possible, and threatened the reporter if the story went forward.
After that, he mostly kept out of the public eye, helping the campaign build African-American and religious coalitions and raising money.
Advertisement
In recent months, Mr. Cohen’s efforts to protect Mr. Trump from claims by two women of extramarital affairs have emerged as a major distraction — and possibly worse — for the White House.
Mr. Cohen’s efforts to silence the pornographic actress Stephanie Clifford, known as Stormy Daniels, began as early as 2011, when he threatened legal action against a tabloid website that tried to publish her story. During the 2016 campaign, he says, he decided on his own to draw $130,000 from a home equity line of credit and pay Ms. Clifford to keep quiet, channeling the payment through a limited liability company.
Mr. Cohen has repeatedly denied any impropriety around the efforts to restrain Ms. Clifford from speaking out. And he has maintained that he was simply trying to deal with a potentially damaging story even though, he said, it was false.
What is more, Mr. Cohen has also insisted that he made the payment to Ms. Clifford without consulting Mr. Trump. Asked recently whether he knew about the payment, Mr. Trump told reporters he did not, and referred questions to Mr. Cohen.
Still, Mr. Cohen’s claim that he struck a nondisclosure agreement with Ms. Clifford by himself, coupled with his effort to force her to comply with it, has exposed Mr. Trump to possibly having to testify about his knowledge of what his lawyer was up to. Ms. Clifford sued Mr. Trump last month, and her lawyer, Michael Avenatti, has filed court papers seeking to depose the president.
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
View all New York Times newsletters.
“As we predicted and as the F.B.I. raid shows,” Mr. Avenatti tweeted on Tuesday, “Mr. Cohen and Mr. Trump are in a lot of trouble.”
In a text message on Tuesday, Mr. Cohen said the investigation had been difficult.
“This has not been easy and has taken a terrible toll on me, my wife and children,” Mr. Cohen said.
Another payment that the F.B.I. is said to be investigating, for $150,000, was made by American Media Inc., the parent company of The National Enquirer. The tabloid business bought the rights to the former Playboy model Karen McDougal’s story alleging an affair with Mr. Trump and never published it. David J. Pecker, now the chairman of A.M.I., was the chief executive of Hachette in the 1990s and for a time published Mr. Trump’s in-house hotel magazine.
Mr. Trump, who was from Queens, and the Bronx-born Mr. Pecker viewed themselves as outsiders looking in at an elitist Manhattan establishment. First at Hachette and later, when he took over chairmanship of A.M.I., Mr. Pecker acquired a reputation for buying and burying stories in ways that protected associates like Mr. Trump.
Several people close to A.M.I. and Mr. Cohen have said that the lawyer was in regular contact with company executives during the presidential campaign, when The Enquirer regularly heralded Mr. Trump and attacked his rivals. The Times reported in February that A.M.I. had shared Ms. McDougal’s allegations with Mr. Cohen, though the company said it did so only as part of efforts to corroborate her story, which it said it could not do. Ms. McDougal’s lawyer at the time, Keith Davidson, and Mr. Cohen communicated around the time as she and A.M.I. were finalizing their deal.
Advertisement
The agreements for Ms. McDougal’s and Ms. Clifford’s silence formed the basis of complaints by the public interest group Common Cause to the Justice Department and the Federal Election Commission. The group claims the payments amounted to improper campaign contributions.
On Monday, as news of the F.B.I. raids broke, The Times reported that the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, was looking into a $150,000 donation to Mr. Trump’s charitable foundation from a Ukrainian billionaire that was solicited by Mr. Cohen during the 2016 campaign. In addition, Mr. Mueller has examined Mr. Cohen’s postelection role in forwarding to the administration a Ukraine-Russia peace proposal pushed by a Ukrainian lawmaker.
And Trump-Russia investigators have also examined the 2015 Moscow deal that Mr. Cohen pushed at a time when his boss was campaigning for the Republican nomination for president.
Mr. Trump’s long-held desire to build a Trump property in Russia found new life when Felix Sater, a friend of Mr. Cohen’s and a longtime associate of Mr. Trump’s, surfaced with a fresh proposal. He exchanged emails and phone calls with Mr. Cohen in late 2015 saying that he had a prospective developer lined up, and that he could use his contacts in Russia to garner Kremlin support for the project.
Mr. Cohen wasted no time, arranging for Mr. Trump to sign a letter of intent for the Moscow tower deal. But the project seemed to stall in the coming months.
Rather than let it go, Mr. Cohen reached out directly to Mr. Putin’s press secretary in January 2016, asking for assistance. Later, he asserted that his effort was unsuccessful.
“I decided to abandon the proposal less than two weeks later for business reasons,” he said, “and do not recall any response to my email.”
A version of this article appears in print on April 11, 2018, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Legal Attack Dog’s Seized Files Could Bite His Client.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Go to Home Page »