Advertisement
By CONCEPCIÓN DE LEÓNJULY 20, 2017

If you are still processing Barack Obama’s presidency and the 2016 election, an abundance of upcoming political books will help you along. Some are expected and have already gotten much press — both Obamas have book deals, as do Joe and Jill Biden; Hillary Clinton has a book out this fall, and James Comey’s was announced this week. Some are more surprising. In March, the White House florist, Laura Dowling, published a book featuring photos of the arrangements she created during her tenure, while Alyssa Mastromonaco, who served as President Obama’s deputy chief of staff, wrote a memoir that is being adapted by Mindy Kaling. And there are even more to come — from a former stenographer and campaign associates, as well as reporters who were on the ground. Here is a list of everyone (so far) who will be memorializing the former administration and President Donald Trump’s subsequent election.
Eric H. Holder Jr., former attorney generalWhat We Know: In the forthcoming “Pursuing Justice,” the former attorney general will touch on both the personal and the political, recounting his immigrant roots — his father was born in Barbados — and discussing how to grapple with the application of justice. Holder will collaborate with with the Pulitzer Prize-winning Douglas Blackmon. The book is expected in 2018. Burning Question: Will Holder tell us more about why he stepped down, or address criticism from the right that he engaged in partisan politics?
Valerie Jarrett, former special adviser to the presidentWhat We Know: In what will be part memoir and part handbook on good citizenship, Jarrett will describe her time as the longest serving senior adviser for the Obama administration, as well as her career in the private sector. Not much more has been shared, but in a recent interview, Jarrett said she hopes her book will serve in part as a “teaching instrument,” instructing readers on leadership and resilience, traits she considers particularly important for young people to learn. The book will be published in 2019. Burning Question: Considering how long Valerie Jarrett has known the Obamas, will she share unheard stories?
John Kerry, former secretary of stateWhat We Know: In an upcoming memoir, Kerry will go over his life, with particular emphasis on moments when he has been on the stage of history. He will give deeper insight into people he’s known, admired and even debated with over the years. Burning Question: Kerry was instrumental in key diplomatic advances including the Paris agreement and the Iran deal. As both are threatened under the current administration, will Kerry defend his legacy?
Advertisement
David Litt, speechwriter for Obama administrationWhat We Know:  Litt, who was the senior presidential speechwriter for Barack Obama, is working on a humorous memoir about his political coming-of-age called “Thanks, Obama: My Hopey Changey White House Years.” He campaigned for Obama in 2008 as a fresh Yale University graduate, and later served as Obama’s speechwriter from 2011 to 2016. During that time, he was in charge of writing Obama’s speech for the White House Correspondents Dinners, for which he came to be called the “chief joke writer.” The book will be published on Sept. 19, 2017.Burning Question: Did Obama ever contribute his own jokes?
Advertisement
Jeremy Bernard and Lea Berman, former social secretaries for the Obama and Bush administrations, respectively.What We Know: Slated for publication on Jan. 9, 2018, “Treating People Well: The Extraordinary Power of Civility at Work and in Life” will be a guide to social skills and etiquette in life and at work. The premise is reflected in the title: Everyone is important and should be treated well. In addition to being a social handbook, the book also includes behind-the-scenes anecdotes from both administrations. Burning Question: How did this pair — who worked under two very different presidents — team up and become friends?
Arne Duncan, former secretary of educationWhat We Know: In this book, Duncan, the former secretary of education, draws from his time in school as well as his experience in office to explore what’s at the root of creating good schools and the challenges of building a just school system for all.Burning Question: Will he comment on the current secretary of education, Betsy DeVos?
Pete Souza,  former official White House photographerWhat We Know: Souza has become a bit of an Instagram celebrity as of late; he frequently posts photos from his time working under President Obama, often with subliminal messaging in response to actions by President Trump that some find controversial. In “Obama: An Intimate Portrait,” which will be out in November, Souza will share more than 300 images taken over his eight years photographing Obama. Along with the photos he will also share anecdotes and stories providing behind-the-scenes context and insight into their relationship.Burning Question: As someone with unfettered access to the president, will he share photos portraying a more intimate side of the Obama family?
Amanda Lucidon, former White House photographerWhat We Know: This October, Amanda Lucidon, who photographed the former first lady, will publish a collection of 150 photographs with personal commentary called “Chasing Light.” Burning Question: Will we see previously unseen images of Michelle Obama with her daughters?
Beck Dorey-Stein, former White House stenographerWhat We Know: In a seven-figure two-book deal, Spiegel & Grau acquired a proposal by a former White House stenographer, Beck Dorey-Stein. “From the Corner of the Oval” tells the story of how Dorey-Stein went from serving cocktails to working at the White House. There, she learned to navigate the political world while working through a series of misadventures in life and love. The book will be out in 2018.Burning Question: This book has not been sold as a tell-all, but rather as an inside look at the relationships of staffers and at the White House as a workplace. But we anticipate a hilarious account, considering that the book was optioned for adaptation as a office comedy by Universal Pictures.
Pat Cunnane, senior writer and deputy director of messagingWhat We Know: In another fish-out-of-water memoir, Cunnane describes how, at 22, he went from working at a warehouse to a position at the White House, where he served under President Obama in a number of capacities. In “West Winging It: An Unpresidential Memoir,” expected in June 2018, Cunnane offers a humorous reflection of his time at the White House. Burning Question: How did he go from working at a warehouse to the White House?
James Clapper, former Director of National IntelligenceWhat We Know: In 2018, Viking will publish this memoir, which will trace Clapper’s career, including the six and a half years he worked under Obama. The book will also discuss his relationships with various presidents and Congress, the growing threat of cyberattacks, and the role Russia played in the presidential election.Burning Question: Clapper promises to describe his efforts to make government intelligence more transparent. What will he reveal about the surveillance of American citizens?
Advertisement
Hillary Clinton, former presidential candidate and secretary of stateWhat We Know: In June, during BookExpo, the annual gathering of publishing professionals, Clinton called losing the 2016 presidential election a “painful experience.” She will reflect on her unsuccessful political campaign in a memoir to be released this September, reflecting on what was going through her mind during the debates and the challenges of being a woman trying to break through barriers, as well as her thoughts on the “wacky things that were said and done” over the course of the campaign. She also said she will discuss the role sexism played in her loss, saying it’s time to “put it in the bright light.”Burning Question: What did she do on election night after she realized she had lost, and what was she thinking?
Corey Lewandowski, former Trump campaign aideWhat We Know: Though no formal announcement has been made, in June it was reported that Lewandowski was closing in on a six-figure deal with Center Street, a conservative imprint of Hachette Book Group. The book was pitched as a joint project with another aide, David Bossie. Burning Question: Why did Lewandowski continue to support Donald Trump even after he fired him?
Donna Brazile, political analyst and authorWhat We Know: It is fitting that Brazile’s book in progress is called “Hacks: The Inside Story of the Break-ins and Breakdowns that Put Donald Trump in the White House.” It was a leak of internal emails from the Democratic National Committee that forced Debbie Wasserman Schultz, the chairwoman at the time, to step down, and Brazile took her place as interim chairwoman. Her memoir, described by Hachette, the book’s publisher, as “equal parts campaign thriller, memoir and road map for the future,” will explore what went wrong in 2016 and also describe the infighting and scandal she discovered during her time leading the DNC. It will be released on Nov. 7, 2017.Burning Question: Brazile became the target of criticism herself when a separate hack appeared to reveal her sharing a question with Hillary Clinton ahead of a debate with Bernie Sanders. She later admitted to the slip, and called it “a mistake I will forever regret” in an essay for Time. Will she elaborate on her indiscretion in the book?
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
View all New York Times newsletters.
Ivana Trump, President Trump’s ex-wifeWhat We Know: Though “Raising Trump,” out in September, is not directly related to the election or to politics, it is included in this roundup for Ivana Trump’s obvious proximity to the administration by way of her children: Ivanka, Donald Jr. and Eric. Her book will reflect on her experience raising them, as well as on the lessons she taught them.Burning Question: What kind of father was President Trump? How does she feel about her children’s involvement in politics?
Katy Tur, journalist for NBC News/ MSNBCWhat We Know: As a frequent target of verbal attacks by Trump on the campaign trail, Tur had a unique vantage point on the 2016 election. In this book, she will offer insight into what it was like to report on Donald Trump, whose victory was at first considered a long shot, and to be embedded in a historic campaign. The book is due out on Sept. 12, 2017.Burning Question: Did she have any private moments with President Trump that the public was not privy to?
Amy Chozick,  New York Times reporter What We Know: Chozick is writing a memoir reflecting on her eight years covering Clinton, first for The Wall Street Journal and then for The Times during the 2016 presidential campaign. Her book will be out in 2018.Burning Question: What does she wish more people knew about former secretary Clinton? What does she know that the public does not?
In addition to the memoirs above, there are also a number of books by journalists and political analysts who have covered the administration and the election. The following books will analyze the political environment over the last eight years.
Laura Ingraham, host of “The Laura Ingraham Show”What We Know: “Billionaire at the Barricades: The Populist Revolution From Reagan to Trump,” which will be published in October, explains how Trump repurposed Reagan’s populist message in his campaign, and details significant historical moments that have defined the movement. Ingraham promises previously unrevealed details, and explains why she understood Trump’s appeal from the beginning of his campaign.
Mark Halperin and John Heilemann, political journalists and analystsWhat We Know: Despite the plethora of political books in the works, the writers, who also created the Showtime series “The Circus,” say Trump “the man” remains undercovered. In addition to an inside look at his campaign, they will also explore Trump as a person.
Advertisement
Edward Klein, journalist and authorWhat We Know: In a new book out this October called “Villains: How the Left’s Plot to Destroy Donald Trump Threatens American Democracy,” Klein will detail a pattern of corruption among political figures on the left and the right who he says are are set on bringing down President Trump.
Keith Olbermann, political and sports analystWhat we know: In “Trump is F**cking Crazy,” out in October, Keith Olbermann promises a humorous yet factual takedown of Trump.
Ben Bradlee Jr., former Boston Globe editorWhat We Know: Out in fall 2018, “The Forgotten: How the Abandoned People of One Pennsylvania County Elected Donald Trump and Changed America” takes an in-depth ethnographic look at Trump voters in Luzerne County, which has traditionally voted Democratic, but went red in this election. They were critical to President Trump’s successful campaign.
E.J. Dionne, Norman Ornstein and Thomas Mann, reportersWhat We Know: “One Nation After Trump” is a call to action, offering an explanation as to how Trump took power and thoughts about countering the threat the authors believe he poses to our democracy. It will be out this fall.
James Poniewozik, TV critic for The New York TimesWhat We Know: In “The Trump Show,” Poniewozik will consider Trump not as a politician, but as a performer.
Kayleigh McEnany, CNN commentatorWhat We Know: Through interviews and stories, McEnany will analyze the populist movement manifested through the popularity of Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders, and Trump’s subsequent election.
Naomi Klein, author and social activistWhat We Know: In “No Is Not Enough: Resisting Trump’s Shock Politics and Winning the World We Need,” Klein will explore why President Trump was successful in winning the presidency, and offer a road map to resistance in the Trump era.
David Frum, senior editor at The AtlanticWhat We Know: In ”Trumpocracy,” Frum argues that President Trump and his family are making a mockery of conservatism and democracy by exploiting his position while the presidency falls to the wayside and into the hands of the financiers around him. The book will be published in January 2018.
We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Go to Home Page »