Advertisement
By ERICA L. GREENAPRIL 1, 2018

WASHINGTON — The organization at the center of one of the largest fraud scandals in the history of for-profit colleges is planning a comeback.
The Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools was stripped of its powers in December 2016 amid the collapse of two for-profit university chains, where tens of thousands of students were encouraged to take on hundreds of millions in debt based on false promises, including jobs after graduation.
The ordeal left thousands of students stranded, and many have since flooded the Education Department with applications for relief from student loan debt. The Obama administration approved about 32,000 claims totaling $449 million.
Now, that same accrediting council is asking to be reinstated by the Trump administration as a federal gatekeeper for hundreds of degree-granting programs and billions of dollars in federal funds.
Advertisement
The move comes as the accrediting agency continues to be the target of criticism. Last week, Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the outspoken chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, singled it out when he charged that for-profit accreditation boards were running “visa mills” used by foreign students to come to the United States with minimal scrutiny.
Advertisement
Michelle Edwards, the council’s president and chief executive, said that two of the schools mentioned in Mr. Grassley’s letter had already had their recognition revoked for failing to meet financial requirements, but that the agency’s criteria do not focus on matters relating to student visas.
The council’s prospective return has outraged student and consumer protection advocates, who worry that it would signal that predatory institutions will be allowed to flourish in the for-profit-friendly administration of Education Secretary Betsy DeVos.
Advising Ms. DeVos are several executives from the for-profit sector, one of whom reportedly helped the council navigate the application process. Ms. DeVos has halted Obama-era regulations that sought to hold for-profit institutions accountable for their poor outcomes, but were denounced by the sector as overly broad and punitive. And she has revamped the process for approving debt relief for defrauded students, granting only some partial relief.
“If they reverse this decision, it will tell accreditors that you can fight back and politically try to retain your eligibility,” said Robert Shireman, a former deputy under secretary at the Education Department who is now a senior fellow at the Century Foundation, a liberal research organization. “And more important, it will tell accreditors that there are no consequences if you do a horrible job.”
Higher education in the United States is largely decentralized, dependent on about 75 regional, national and specialized accrediting agencies to serve as watchdogs for postsecondary institutions that have access to federal student aid. The agencies are relied upon to regularly evaluate the quality of institutions to ensure they comply with federal education law. The accreditors are responsible for flagging and penalizing schools that do not.
Most public, private and nonprofit higher education institutions are regionally accredited, while national and specialized accreditors tend to draw for-profit and trade schools. To receive federal financial aid funding, schools must be accredited by an Education Department-recognized agency. The Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools was responsible for about 240 institutions that received $4.7 billion in taxpayer money when it came under scrutiny in 2015.
For-profit accreditation has faced scrutiny dating back to the early years of the G.I. Bill, when the institutions were accused of preying on veterans who received large sums of federal education funding when they returned from war.
Advertisement
But it had been decades since the for-profit sector felt as targeted as it did under the Obama administration, industry leaders say. And they contend that a reinstatement of the banished accrediting council could remedy the unfair treatment meted out by the previous White House. A federal judge recently ruled that the department had acted “arbitrarily and capriciously” in determining the council’s fate.
“All we have ever asked for is due process and fairness,” said Steve Gunderson, a former Republican congressman who leads the trade organization Career Education Colleges and Universities. “We now hope the current secretary will recognize the need to work with A.C.I.C.S. and the schools impacted by this ruling.”
The independent advisory committee that vets accrediting bodies, called the National Advisory Committee on Institutional Quality and Integrity, will consider the council’s application in May, just a few weeks before dozens of schools serving at least 100,000 students that are still operating under its purview will lose accreditation.
The chairman of the bipartisan committee is Arthur Keiser, a political appointee who challenged the panel’s original recommendation to terminate the council’s recognition. He also formerly ran a for-profit college, Keiser University, that settled claims of misrepresentation before he sold it to a nonprofit organization started by his family.
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
View all New York Times newsletters.
The Obama administration revoked the agency’s accrediting power after it had racked up nearly two dozen violations in federal quality and accountability standards. In a letter rendering its decision, the department said it was not confident that the agency could address all of its problems in one year.
Officials at the council say it has made more than 50 improvements.
“Today, as a result of these changes, we are a fundamentally different agency and, I believe, a better one,” Ms. Edwards, the council’s president, said in a statement.
Consumer protection and student advocates are unconvinced.
“I think it’s an awfully bold claim that a fundamentally flawed agency can erase years of misbehavior in a matter of months,” said Ben Miller, an Obama administration official who is now the senior director of postsecondary education at the liberal Center for American Progress, and who has tracked the council’s progress. “It really has the feel as if someone went on a diet for a week and said, ‘Look, I’ve completely changed my lifestyle.’”
For years, the accrediting body gave its seal of approval to institutions plagued by complaints, and oversaw for-profit schools that had some of the lowest graduation rates in the country and some of the highest rates of student loan defaults.
It accredited Corinthian Colleges even as it was declaring bankruptcy in 2015, and the agency did not pull the accreditation of ITT Technical Institute until after the federal advisory panel recommended the termination of the council’s recognition.
Advertisement
Ms. Edwards said the organization had overhauled its governance structure to eliminate conflicts of interest. It established an ethics committee, created a group to monitor complaints and identify at-risk institutions, and strengthened data collection by requiring campuses to file quarterly and annual accountability reports.
“We are ready for the scrutiny because we believe today’s A.C.I.C.S. fully meets the criteria to be recognized by the department,” she said.
In a letter to the Education Department, 20 state attorneys general disagreed. The officials wrote that the council had been found to be out of compliance with federal standards as recently as February 2017, and therefore does not meet the requirement that an agency demonstrate effective compliance for at least two years before seeking initial recognition.
“Given the gravity of A.C.I.C.S.’s recent dereliction and the magnitude of the harm A.C.I.C.S. caused to students and taxpayers, any attempt by A.C.I.C.S. to become nationally recognized once again should be treated with great skepticism by the department,” the letter read.
The agency’s application became public only after a lawsuit by the Century Foundation, and critics who have scrutinized the application said the council failed to demonstrate that it had put in place more rigorous standards. In  a letter to the department, the foundation, which combed through more than 20,000 pages of application materials, said that the bulk of the agency’s letters of support had come from institutions that it accredited.
But in a break for its application, Judge Reggie B. Walton of United States District Court for the District of Columbia ruled on March 23 that the Obama administration had failed to take into account 36,000 pages of relevant supplemental information as it deliberated the agency’s fate in 2016. Judge Walton wrote that former Education Secretary John King’s “decision-making process was flawed.”
The judgment did not overturn the Obama Education Department’s decision, or weigh in on whether it was justified, but sent the case to Ms. DeVos to reconsider.
The judge’s action was cheered by for-profit agencies that had long complained that the Obama administration targeted the accrediting organization unfairly.
“Yes, our sector has had bad schools like every sector of higher education,” Mr. Gunderson said. “But it is time that everyone across the political spectrum stop, step back and look for ways to work together to establish public policies that treat all sectors of higher education on a fair and equal basis. The ideological wars must end.”
A version of this article appears in print on April 2, 2018, on Page A11 of the New York edition with the headline: Organization Oversaw For-Profit Colleges That Imploded. Now It Seeks a Comeback.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
See More »
Go to Home Page »