Advertisement
By CHARLES HOMANSJULY 28, 2017

In December, seven months before President Trump announced his intention to ban transgender people from serving in the military, I attended one of Trump’s postelection victory rallies, in Grand Rapids, Mich., with a Trump supporter named Jayne Locke. As it happened, Locke was a transgender veteran. This was not one of those journalistic exercises in deliberate expectation-thwarting; it had happened more or less by chance. On my way to Grand Rapids, I had been canvassing Facebook looking for Trump supporters who were going to the rally, and Locke was the one who wrote me back. When she did, she was quick to note something that was not readily apparent from her Facebook page: “I’m not sure if you are aware of this or not, but I am not only a Trump supporter but also a transsexual woman Trump supporter.”
When I found Locke the following afternoon at the DeltaPlex Arena, she was dressed in a mauve turtleneck sweater and a cap that said VIETNAM VETERAN; she served in the Air Force, at a Strategic Air Command base in North Dakota. “I’m very much a fiscal conservative, but a social liberal,” she told me as we waited in our seats, a dozen rows up from the floor of the arena, for the show to start. She was a lifelong libertarian and an intermittently active Republican. She worked in engine development for Ford for 29 years, she told me, until the program she worked on was scuttled. A year later, her job was, too. This was 2006, which was also the year that Locke decided to transition; she began hormone therapy the next year. “Your entire life, you look at yourself, and you don’t see the person that everybody else sees,” she told me. “It’s very disconcerting. It’s not something you can talk to anyone about. You don’t even want to admit it to yourself.”
Since then, Locke had been self-employed. After Ford, she interviewed for some full-time positions but never got them, and she could not shake the suspicion, even if she couldn’t prove it, that it had to do with the transition. “Everybody says, ‘We can’t wait to bring you on board, but we have to do a background check.’ And then I don’t hear from them ever again.” At church, where she played bass in the ensemble that performed at worship services, “I was told that they couldn’t allow someone like me to represent the church — as if I’m doing something sinful, or I’m evil. And that crushed my soul.”
When Trump gave his speech announcing his candidacy, Locke told me, “I listened to that, and I was drawn to Trump immediately.” She liked what he had to say about regulations, border security, immigration. When he came to Michigan, she went to the rallies and phone-banked for him. She pulled out her phone to show me a picture she took of him at one of the rallies, a view from the crowd, the glare from the spotlights giving him a slightly apparitional quality. “I was standing front and center,” she said. “Trump, when he came out, saw my hat, and he looked at me and said: ‘Thank you for your service.’ Ted Nugent” — he was the opening act — “saluted me.”
Advertisement
Locke had little love for social conservatives but also had little for Democratic members of the L.G.B.T. community who couldn’t understand why her gender identity didn’t dictate her politics. Part of what appealed to her about the Trump supporters she came to know was how little they seemed to care about that identity. “Out of all the people I’ve ever had the opportunity to speak with about politics,” she said, “the Trump supporters, quite frankly, they don’t give a damn one way or another what your orientation is — whether you’re a trans individual or not. There are some extremists, but there are extremists in all walks of life. Has anyone given me a hard time since we’ve been together?” I shook my head. Locke swiped some more on her phone until she came to a photo from a rally in Novi, Mich., in which she was flanked by two burly bearded men from the Bikers for Trump. “Do they look like they give a damn?”
Advertisement
They didn’t — and this was something that struck me, too, at the handful of Trump rallies and similar events I attended before and after the election. The abiding atmosphere, encouraged by Trump himself, was always us versus them, and eruptions of collective rage — toward protesters, reporters, Hillary Clinton in absentia — that would have been hard to imagine in pre-Trump American politics were routine. But among the Trump supporters themselves, within the safety of the self-defined “us,” there was palpable loosening of the strictures that have traditionally attended sexuality and gender in Republican politics, a genuine-seeming acceptance of difference in the midst of a political movement that had been, from the beginning, a hurricane of polarized identity. It was something that my liberal friends never quite seemed to believe when I described it to them — and that disbelief, I think, was part of the point.
Ever since Republican politics absorbed the substance and style of talk radio, they have contained a tension between advancing actual conservative ideas and instinctively embracing anything that seems likely to antagonize liberal sensibilities — categories that overlap substantially but not completely. During George W. Bush’s first term, there was the brief vogue among conservative intellectuals for “ ‘South Park’ Republicans”: a term, coined by the iconoclastic conservative journalist and “South Park” superfan Andrew Sullivan, to describe people like Sullivan himself, who were socially liberal but “believe we need a hard-ass foreign policy and are extremely skeptical of political correctness.” It was an intriguing sort of identity jujitsu, making a case for a more pluralistic Republicanism as a mischievous rebellion against liberals’ own rigidly enforced pluralism.
The conservative journalist Brian C. Anderson ran with this idea, publishing an influential article in 2003 (and later a book) on the subject arguing that a young cohort of “South Park” Republicans would emerge from a culture war that the left, through its overreaching sanctimony, was already busily losing for itself. Anderson argued that “conservative critics should pay closer attention to what ‘South Park’ so irreverently jeers at and mocks. As the show’s co-creator, 32-year-old Matt Stone, sums it up: ‘I hate conservatives, but I really [expletive] hate liberals.’ ”
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
View all New York Times newsletters.
The great rightward youth realignment has not, in four subsequent presidential elections, come to pass; young Republicans are indeed much more enthusiastic about gay marriage, for instance, than their elders, but young people are not broadly more Republican. “South Park” Republicanism’s most notable legacy, in retrospect, may be its inadvertent anticipation of Trump’s transformation of Republican politics: its implicit argument for replacing an animus toward social liberalism with an animus toward liberals as people. From there, it is only a short jump to the endlessly malleable politics of Trump, in which the only irreducible fact is whether someone voted for him or didn’t.
This sort of highly personalized partisanship is irresponsible and dangerous, but in its elevation of tribal loyalty over ideological or even cultural principles, it does create openings and fluidities that did not exist before. In January, the night before Trump’s inauguration, I went to the DeploraBall, the party thrown by and for members of the so-called alt-right wing of the new president’s base (though some of the organizers by then had rejected the “alt-right” label). A number of the luminaries at the event were openly gay — among them Jim Hoft, editor of the Gateway Pundit blog, who got up onstage to introduce Lucian Wintrich, the young artist he was dispatching to Washington as the blog’s credentialed White House correspondent. Wintrich, Hoft declared, had been attacked by “the gay mafia” after putting on a photo exhibit at a Gays for Trump party during the Republican National Convention: “Lucian put together all these pictures of twinks for Trump, these hot young guys with their shirts off and Trump hats on, and it drove the left [expletive] crazy.”
The crowd erupted in cheers. The move here was obvious enough: What better way to screw with liberals’ self-image than to ostentatiously affect tolerance? But the applause that lines like this got seemed genuine, not ironic. There was a palpable feeling of exhilaration, a sense of trying on identities that were until recently off-limits but were now fair game. Maybe that meant putting on a Pepe the Frog lapel pin; maybe it meant cheering the auteur behind a bunch of Make America Great Again-themed beefcake photos. Maybe it meant both at once.
But taboo-breaking is not actually the same as tolerance. If liberals misunderstood the complexities of the identity politics coursing through Trump’s base, they were not wrong about Trump himself. A politician who blithely played out-group politics during the campaign whenever it was convenient is unlikely to stop at just one group, or two, or three. Nor is it really a surprise that the same week Trump abruptly curtailed transgender rights, he just as abruptly threatened the career of Jeff Sessions, the administration official most revered by the alt-right. In a politics with no fixed beliefs, only instrumental ones, anyone can become an instrument: a Syrian refugee, a transgender soldier, an attorney general with inconvenient institutional principles.
On Wednesday, after Trump announced the transgender ban on Twitter in an early-morning tweet storm, I wrote to Locke to see what she made of it. “That is very disturbing,” she wrote back tersely. We spoke later that day. “It was very much out of line with what I thought his views were on the issue,” she told me. “He’s made positive statements in the past; he’s been critical of those who’ve been hard on the trans community. But then again,” she sighed, “he has a political debt to pay, too.” A Trump administration official, describing the rationale for the ban to Axios’ Jonathan Swan Wednesday morning, was breathtakingly candid in acknowledging the political expediency of it: “This forces Democrats in Rust Belt states like Ohio, Michigan and Wisconsin to take complete ownership of this issue. How will the blue-collar voters in these states respond when senators up for re-election in 2018 like Debbie Stabenow are forced to make their opposition to this a key plank of their campaigns?”
Former Gov. Pat McCrory of North Carolina, a Republican who lost in 2016 — even as Trump won his state — after his fate was tied to the State Legislature’s “bathroom bill,” which he signed into law, might have an interesting answer to that question. Trump’s understanding of his own base is ultimately no less cartoonish than his understanding of his many enemies. More than 40 municipalities in Michigan now have nondiscrimination ordinances on the books, many of them in deeply red counties, including the small rural community where Locke lives.
Advertisement
“That just tells you the level of acceptance the people of the state of Michigan have,” she told me in December. “If you were to go to the House of Representatives in Lansing, or the Senate” — each now controlled by Republicans — “they’re just as bad as McCrory is in North Carolina. But they have this twisted perception of what the people really think. People don’t give a damn.” On the other hand, there were a lot of things that people didn’t seem to give a damn about before Trump swept them up in the magpie-style assemblage of his politics. And then, all of a sudden, they did.
Charles Homans is the politics editor for the magazine.
We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Go to Home Page »