Advertisement
By TRIP GABRIELMARCH 2, 2018

BURGETTSTOWN, Pa. — The steel mill where Patti Stroud’s husband worked for 26 years shut down a few weeks before Election Day in 2016. Though she is a registered Democrat, Ms. Stroud had long since drifted away from the party over its liberal social policies. So she voted for Donald J. Trump, hoping he would shake up Washington and bring back steel, the way he promised.
“I’m not a loyal anything,” she said. “I used to vote straight Democrat all the time, but those times have changed.”
Sixteen months later, Ms. Stroud, a 56-year-old house cleaner, feels politically adrift again.
“I thought we needed a big change, and boy, did we get it,” she said ruefully outside an I.G.A. market recently. President Trump “put his foot in his mouth one too many times,” she said.
Most of the country will have to wait until November to have another say in a federal election, but Ms. Stroud and her neighbors in southwest Pennsylvania will get their chance much sooner, in a special election March 13 to fill a vacant congressional seat. And how they feel about Mr. Trump now may make a big difference in the race.
Advertisement
In the past, it has been a safe seat for the Republicans: Mr. Trump carried the district by 20 percentage points in 2016, and the Democrats did not even field a candidate that year.
Advertisement
But they have one now in Conor Lamb, 33, a former Marine and federal prosecutor. And he is running against a Republican who proudly claims he was “Trump before Trump was Trump.”
Faced with that choice, Ms. Stroud said she was coming home to the Democrats.
Mr. Lamb, a first-time candidate, has raised hopes in his party that it can win back white non-college-educated voters in places like western Pennsylvania — the ones who helped propel Mr. Trump into the White House.
Polls suggest that Mr. Lamb is running close behind his Republican opponent, Rick Saccone, whose struggles have set off alarms in the White House and among national Republicans. An upset victory by Mr. Lamb, or even a narrow loss, would send shock waves ahead of the midterm elections in the fall, when Democrats will try to retake control of the House of Representatives.
In dozens of interviews with voters last week in the 18th Congressional District, which runs from the suburbs south and east of Pittsburgh to the West Virginia border, there was no shortage of Patti Strouds — Trump voters who are now disappointed in his presidency, or at least have mixed feelings about it.
Like her, many of these voters have historically been Democrats but now feel little allegiance to either party. In the interviews, they did not dwell on policy issues so much as vent their frustrations with the politicians both parties send to Washington, who bicker rather than solve problems.
“There needs to be something done down there, it’s a mess from the top to the bottom,” said Harriett Brautigam, 90, who lives in Bethel Park, a suburb where Vice President Mike Pence campaigned for Mr. Saccone in February. “I’m a Republican, but I don’t like the president at all,” she said.
Voters’ dissatisfaction with Mr. Trump boiled down to frustrations over the daily chaos they see in the president’s constant reversal of positions, petty insults on Twitter even toward allies, and a failure to lead Congress.
Advertisement
“I’m not very pleased with him at all,” said Graydon Cartmell, 73, a retired international trade executive who voted for Mr. Trump. Even the Republicans’ signature achievement, a tax cut bill, Mr. Cartmell deemed unsatisfying. “It certainly doesn’t benefit the middle class that much,” he said.
Mr. Lamb, the scion of a local political family, is a moderate Democrat who supports natural gas fracking, opposes raising the minimum wage to $15 an hour, and said the day after the mass shooting at a high school in Florida that the country does not need new gun laws.
“I’m not running against President Trump,” he told voters last week as he campaigned door to door, mostly at the homes of registered Republicans and independents. “I want to work with people on the other side,” he said. “I think we need a whole lot of young people in there to start over.”
Republicans recognize the stakes and have poured resources into the race. The White House has sent not only Mr. Pence, but Mr. Trump himself, to campaign for Mr. Saccone, who is an Air Force veteran and a conservative state representative.
“I have a record of doing what I say, and my opponent has no record,” Mr. Saccone said in a candidates’ debate last week.
National Republican groups have poured $10 million into the race, outspending Democratic groups by 10 to one, according to a New York Times analysis. Television ads attack Mr. Lamb over plea deals he made as an assistant United States attorney and insist that he would be a “rubber stamp” for Nancy Pelosi, the California Democrat who leads the House minority. (Mr. Lamb released a TV ad saying he did not support Ms. Pelosi.)
Pennsylvania
Pittsburgh
18th
Congressional
District
Philadelphia
MARCH 2, 2018

Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. is scheduled to stump for Mr. Lamb on Tuesday, and the Lamb campaign said this week that it had raised $3.2 million in the first seven weeks of 2018, an extraordinary sum that is a measure of Democratic enthusiasm.
Even so, national Democrats are trying to tamp down expectations for the race. Having seen hopes for special-election upsets fall short last year in Georgia, Kansas, Montana and South Carolina, they are wary of another setback in Pennsylvania.
Advertisement
The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee has so far spent only modestly on the race. “We look at places that have dormant or growing Democratic DNA, and this one has neither,” said Meredith Kelly, a spokeswoman for the committee. “I think people underestimate that this is a tough district.”
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
View all New York Times newsletters.
Still, even a closely fought defeat for Mr. Lamb would be a kind of victory, raising his profile for another run in November.
He recently got good news from the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, which redrew the state’s congressional district map to replace one gerrymandered heavily to favor Republicans. For the November election, Mr. Lamb’s hometown, Mt. Lebanon, will be in the newly drawn 17th District, where votes cast for the two parties have divided much more equally than they have in the current 18th District. Republican leaders are seeking to block the new map in federal court.
In conversations with voters, the failure of politicians to keep their promises was a common theme, enveloping the White House, Congress and the reason for the special election in the first place. Tim Murphy, an anti-abortion Republican, resigned from the seat last year after a mistress claimed he urged her to “abort our unborn child,” according to a text obtained by The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
“People say they’re conservative, and then it turns out things aren’t what they say once they get into office,” complained Tom Moore, 38, a Republican who works in a water treatment plant in the district.
Mr. Moore voted for Mr. Trump, but he judged the president’s first year in office as merely fair, saying that even with full Republican control in Washington, not much had been done. “The turnover has happened, but nothing has changed,” he said. He is undecided in the congressional race.
Ms. Stroud, the wife of the laid-off steelworker, who died in a car accident last year, said by telephone on Thursday that Mr. Trump’s announcement of tariffs to protect the American steel industry had not changed her mind about either the president or the congressional race. “I still want to see Conor Lamb win,” she said. “I think Saccone would be one of Trump’s henchmen, and I don’t trust him.”
Diana Myers, 68, a retired property manager, was the rare voter who expressed strong allegiance to either party. She said she is for Mr. Saccone “because he’s a Republican, and because I like Donald Trump.”
Local job gains in natural gas drilling have helped to offset losses in the steel and coal industries, but the region is still struggling economically. The new steel buildings of drilling service companies often face crumbling farmhouses and overgrown idle fields. The latest iteration of the Farm Aid benefit concert was held last fall in Burgettstown, a small town in Washington County, a bellwether region in the district.
Advertisement
Flo McCoy, 58, emerged from the I.G.A. market in Burgettstown with a fistful of lottery scratch-offs for homebound seniors.
“I’ll be honest with you, I’m below poverty level,” said Ms. McCoy, whose only income is $855 a month in Social Security disability benefits.
Ms. McCoy voted for Mr. Trump — “I figured it would be a change” — but she plans to vote for Mr. Lamb, because she is worried that Republicans in Washington will cut Social Security to pay for the recent tax cut. “I’m going back to my Democrats,” she said.
Up the road in Washington, the county seat, wet snow fell as shoppers hurried into another market, a Shop ‘n Save.
Karl Schultz, 56, who works in the field for a gas company, said he supports Mr. Saccone because “I lean to the right.”
Mr. Schultz voted for Mr. Trump, and is pleased with the White House so far. Judy Dulaney, 65, a retired employee of the state Department of Welfare, voted for him too, but she said she now regrets it.
“I did not like either Clinton or Trump, but I figured the lesser of two evils was Trump,” she said. “Now I’m second-guessing myself. Because he’s nuts.”
She said she would vote for Mr. Lamb. “Where he says we need to work together, not just as a Democrat, not just as a Republican, but one united group — that is one of the things that impressed me,” she said.
Rachel Shorey contributed reporting from Washington.
A version of this article appears in print on March 3, 2018, on Page A14 of the New York edition with the headline: At Heart of Tight Race, Folks Who Picked Trump But Wish They Hadn’t.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Go to Home Page »