Deciphering the rise of a lifestyle guru who sells self-absorption as the ultimate luxury product.
By MOLLY YOUNGMAY 25, 2017

The amount of time I waste finding and consuming alternative-medicine supplements for “brain function” has made me at least 10 percent dumber, and that paradox is not lost on me. It was this impulse that made me pause last year at a fancy store in Brooklyn when I spotted a glass jar labeled “Brain Dust.” It had the kind of packaging that signals discreet luxury: minimalist matte label, custom type, the word “organic.” A 2.2-ounce jar cost $55. “This adaptogenic potion lights up your brain and increases mental flow,” the label said. “Neuron velocity and vision are fine tuned by toning the brain waves, in particular the alpha waves that connect to creativity.” It seemed like the kind of item that might be a prop in a comedy sketch about millennial idiots, or something a person would be duped into buying on a hidden-camera prank show.
I did not buy the Brain Dust, but I looked it up online, because I will pursue anything that claims to make me smarter. The product’s ingredients were mysterious: lion’s mane, shilajit, astragalus, rhodiola, stevia, maca. It was sold by a company named Moon Juice, which called itself “a healing force, an etheric potion, a cosmic beacon for those seeking out beauty, wellness and longevity.” In other words, a chain of juice stores in Los Angeles. I thought about Brain Dust for weeks.
The name alone seemed precision-calibrated to reel me in. It wasn’t “Brain Powder,” which sounds unappealingly man-made — protein powder, baby powder, foot powder — but “Dust,” which suggests that the ingredients assembled themselves with the spontaneity of snowflakes on a twig. Then there was the label, with its “alpha waves” and “adaptogenic potion” and “neuron velocity.” This was language as Impressionist paint daub; not a signifier of meaning but a blurry, mood-inducing gesture. Questions lingered. Can brain waves be toned? Who is the Brain Dust customer? Does she have no grasp on reality, or does she simply aspire to have no grasp on reality? Why do I assume it’s a woman?
A short time later, a news release touting a Moon Juice cookbook appeared in my inbox. It described the book’s author and Moon Juice’s founder, Amanda Chantal Bacon, as “a powerful influencer in the wellness space,” which struck me as the most penetratingly of-the-moment group of words I’d ever read. The release noted that Moon Juice had been featured on Gwyneth Paltrow’s lifestyle platform, Goop, and was beloved by celebrities like Shailene Woodley, who is herself known for dispensing peculiar wellness advice (like eating clay and sunbathing the vagina). The words “Eastern healing,” “glowing skin,” “nationwide following” and “social media” made their way onto the page. In the space of roughly 500 words, someone — a junior book publicist, probably — had managed to concentrate the zeitgeist of contemporary female celebrity into its purest form. Amanda Chantal Bacon, whoever she was, was like a superextract distilled from a combination of Paltrow, Jessica Alba, Miranda Kerr, Ayesha Curry and every other contemporary lifestyle guru. Unlike the others, she didn’t have an acting or a modeling career (or a famous husband) to vault her into the public sphere. But she had all the right nouns and adjectives: a robust Instagram following, a line of signature products, an aspirational and photogenic home and enough branding talent to ensnare my gaze and capture my imagination, even if I was ashamed of its capture.
Advertisement
She had also gone viral. In May 2015, Elle featured Bacon’s daily diet, which included items like ho shou wu, silver needle tea, pearl, reishi, cordyceps, quinton shots, bee pollen and chaga. These foods — substances? — were unfamiliar to most readers. “I Have Never Heard of, Much Less Eaten, Any of the Foods in This Juice Lady’s Food Diary” was the title of a sneering Jezebel article that followed. Another site estimated Bacon’s grocery tab to be $709.75, or about 4.5 times what a typical American spends on food a week.
Here was proof of the extent to which our nascent wellness culture had finally matured: a woman whose lifestyle was extreme to the point of inscrutability and expensive to the point of implausibility. It’s not surprising that Bacon was mocked; the internet backlash practically wrote itself. The amazing thing was that she was also embraced. She expanded her business, published a cookbook, spoke at conferences and appeared in Vogue. As her fame has rippled outward, so has her influence.
When did celebrities become lifestyle gurus? What exactly is a “lifestyle”? These are questions you might ask yourself over a turmeric latte while reading about Jessica Alba’s Honest Company or browsing silver-plated toast racks on Reese Witherspoon’s website. The model for all of these women is, of course, Gwyneth Paltrow, an icon of consumerist feminism who embodies what has come to be the holy trinity of celebrity personas: mother, healthful-living expert, entrepreneur. To achieve moguldom, a Gwyneth in training must exemplify all three facets and turn the sum into a “brand,” which is to say an art-directed social-media-fueled dream world balancing outrageous aspiration with a teaspoon of self-conscious realness.
Advertisement
This archetype of female celebrity came into being around 2008, when Paltrow started mass-emailing her shopping tips and musings to voluntary subscribers. What began as only a newsletter called Goop grew to include an e-commerce platform, a book-publishing imprint, a clothing label, a skin-care brand, a fragrance line and a vitamins-and-supplements line. It was also an unwitting generator of memes (conscious uncoupling, vaginal steaming), but despite the ridicule, Goop helped the words “lifestyle brand” conquer today’s corporate vocabulary. IHOP now claims to be one.
Paltrow’s innovation was to embody the notion of “wellness” as both a great equalizer (we all want more energy) and a fetish of the 1 percent (check out this $700 juicer). Other women soon followed. In 2012 Jessica Alba co-founded the Honest Company, which sells eco-friendly diapers and aromatic soy candles and is reportedly worth $1.7 billion. In the ensuing years, a number of celebrities announced that they were starting lifestyle websites, including Vanessa Hudgens, Lindsay Lohan, Shay Mitchell and Blake Lively. In late 2010, Arianna Huffington moved into the sphere, with a TED Talk in which she explained that people should sleep. On the strength of the talk, which went viral, she published a book, “The Sleep Revolution,” and started a wellness venture called Thrive Global, whose website features articles like “How a Broken Arm Cured My Chronic Multitasking” and “Let’s Have Dinner and Talk About Death.” Huffington’s site also sells a gratitude journal, a treadmill desk, a “Wellness Ball” and a miniature wooden bed with satin sheets that you’re supposed to tuck your phone into at night.
Most luxury products are pitched to appeal to a sense of decadence or exclusivity in consumers. Products in the wellness category, which also tend to be decadent and exclusive — Huffington’s phone bed costs $100 — are instead pitched as tools of right-living. The second time I spotted Brain Dust in the wild was at a coffee shop in the Hamptons, where it shared shelf space with “cruelty free” toothpaste and boeuf-bourguignon-flavored dog biscuits. “We believe dogs deserve real food,” read the dog-biscuit slogan.
Paying fastidious attention to the minutiae of moods, appetites and sleep habits (or those of a pet) is an activity long enjoyed by the rich and underoccupied, from Edith Wharton heroines to the Kardashian sisters. In Wharton’s day, this kind of life was coveted without being heralded as exactly virtuous. Its opposite, meanwhile — the quotidian physical martyrdom that was the lot of the working class — was at least given its due as a creditable human quality.
Thanks to advances in technology, our economy has transformed since Wharton’s day, albeit not in the way that Keynes predicted. Instead of bringing about a leisure class living in actual leisure, we have wrought a world where the upwardly mobile are instead obsessed with productivity. Indeed, productivity itself has become a kind of class signifier. Even recreation among the elite bears the hallmarks of work, with metrics and documentation governing all activity. As the increasing demands of work sow anxiety among the elite, leisure time has become a zone heavy with contradiction.
In our wellness-obsessed era, the idea of working yourself to the bone is no longer a commendable trait but a failure of self-care; recreation is now cast as a divine pursuit. “There is a cosmic calling and powerful movement here to push us forward as a race,” Bacon writes in her cookbook’s introduction. “A big part of the movement is caring for our bodies, as well as for the health of our planet. Anytime we make a move toward supporting or joining that mission, we tune in to the flow of otherworldly success and abundance.” What Goop (and acolytes like Moon Juice) sell is the notion that it’s not only excusable but worthy for a person to spend hours a day focused on her tiniest mood shifts, food choices, beauty rituals, exercise habits, bathing routines and sleep schedule. What they sell is self-​absorption as the ultimate luxury product.
I met Bacon on the West Side of Los Angeles, where she lives in a 4,000-square-foot home concealed from the street by plants and stairs and a patio containing a Japanese soaking tub, a string of prayer flags, a trio of scooters (belonging to her son, Rohan) and a tiny metropolis of painted rocks (also Rohan). Birds chirped as I climbed to the front door. Somewhere in the distance, an electric lawn mower mowed, but the air was otherwise drenched in a silence that didn’t accord with any concept I had of being in a city.
The front door stood open, and Bacon sailed around in the kitchen ahead. An assistant sat at the countertop typing on an iPhone. I am accustomed to New York City kitchens the size of a bathtub, but this one was majestic by any standard. Every surface stretched gleamingly into the distance: the countertops, the professional range, the island with its basket of gourds, French press and sticks of burning Frankincense. I hollered hello and hesitated at the threshold a moment, waiting to be asked in, but the two kept working, so I entered without a summons. “One thing,” Bacon called out, as a greeting. “Shoes.” I removed them.
Advertisement
“I’m about to Dust your coffee,” she said, skipping introductions. Bacon, who is 34, wore a wispy white gown that wafted after her, with a thick untied braid trailing over her left shoulder. Her skin was, indeed, glowing; her cheeks had rose-petal qualities. The kitchen windows faced a hillside resplendent with tropical plants. Acorns occasionally scattered to Earth outside, landing at the feet of a stone deity, who sat among moistly dripping ferns.
Bacon’s assistant evaporated out the door as her boss set a plate on the kitchen counter: strawberry-rose-geranium bars, tiny “doughnuts” made with mushroom and quinoa and a cinnamon bun that looked as if it were forged by a chic cave man with primitive tools. All of it was vegan, organic and raw. She poured coffee from a yellow enamel pot and slid onto a stool beside me, curling her bare feet up and arraying gauzy cottons around her. Sunshine glowed through the layers. She was, I was quickly realizing, the kind of woman who always seems backlit.
“There’s a lot of Power Dust in that,” she said, pointing to the coffee. Power Dust, like Brain Dust, is a formula of stevia-sweetened powdered herbs that Moon Juice sells in an attractive jar. I would describe the taste as “soil-forward.”
“Is it possible to overdose on Dust?” I asked. “I had two doses this morning, and I also had two last night.” In an effort to test the products, I’d been guinea-pigging. So far, any effects were undetectable.
“No,” Bacon said. “You’re good. You’re safe. I mean, is it possible to overdose? You’d probably have severe physical symptoms first.”
As a housekeeper vacuumed nearby, Bacon kicked into her origin story. Growing up in New York City, she was a sickly child (“bronchial stuff”) whose parents took her to doctors (“I got pumped through the Western-medicine chain”) without satisfactory results (“Of course nothing helped”). One day she went shopping with her family at a downtown health-food store, where, the story goes, an Ayurvedic doctor visiting from India overheard Bacon coughing. The doctor came over and posed some questions (“Very typical Ayurvedic ones, like ‘How often do you poop?’ ”) and took the child’s pulse. After examining Bacon’s tongue, the man provided her mother with a list of forbidden foods: cow’s milk, wheat and white sugar, among others. Bacon stopped eating gluten at age 4 and became a vegetarian at around 7.
She is aware that these biographical details invite ridicule, but Bacon doesn’t care if people make fun of her. She’s used to it. And anyway, hers was a challenging childhood: “I was told growing up that I had learning disabilities and mental illness. That was all the rage in the ’90s.” She reflected on her past calmly. “I came from a family that was like: ‘Yes. Whatever the doctor says is right. Just take the pills.’ ” (Bacon’s mother was the C.E.O. of the fashion company Betsey Johnson, and her father was a musician.)
At 18, Bacon moved to Italy alone. Why Italy? “If I thought about all the times I felt connected or alive, it was around the rituals of people gathering and eating and sharing food and slowing down,” she said. In Florence, Bacon discovered that food was her calling. After several years of traveling, she wound up at a culinary school in Vermont. Following graduation, she emailed the Los Angeles-based chef and restaurateur Suzanne Goin and asked for a job. Goin emailed back with an invitation to meet. Bacon hopped on a plane and moved into a garage three blocks from one of Goin’s restaurants, where she hand-whisked aioli and pounded salsa verde with a mortar and pestle until her biceps ached. In early 2012, having absorbed lessons of entrepreneurship from Goin, she opened the first store. “It really is not my name,” she explained, when I asked where the phrase Moon Juice came from. “It just dropped down from the universe.”
Advertisement
Along with cucumber-pineapple-jalapeño juice and almond milk, the first Moon Juice sold organic bananas with walnut butter and cacao cashew snack bites. In 2014, Shailene Woodley was photographed carrying a Moon Juice tote bag. Zoë Kravitz called it her favorite juice bar. Bacon appeared on Goop to make “spirit truffles” and “sex bark” with Paltrow in 2015. New Moon Juice locations opened in Silver Lake and on Melrose Place.
Bacon turned her focus inward, toward marketing the herbal remedies she’d been incorporating into her diet for years. In 2014, the company added the line of jarred herb powders that now includes Spirit Dust, Beauty Dust, Power Dust, Brain Dust, Dream Dust and Sex Dust. The formulas sampled Ayurvedic and Chinese medicine; the labels instructed users to mix a teaspoon with hot or cold liquid (“Don’t be afraid to double dose!”). The Dusts proved to be what a venture capitalist might call an “inflection point”: unlike raw juices, they were easy to package and ship, had a long shelf life and faced zero competition from the likes of Coca-Cola (which, for example, has invested mightily in juice, including a $90 million stake in a company called Suja Life). They could be marketed as a beauty supplement and sold in stores like Saks Fifth Avenue. The Dusts were scalable.
And Bacon insists they work. “People really report back: Wow, my skin changed,’ ” she said, turbocharging into evangelical mode. “I hear incredible stories from people. There was a young, beautiful woman who approached me at an event. She said, ‘I’ve been coming into Moon Juice, I had breast cancer,’ and she went through all that hormonal treatment, and by going through it, she no longer had a sex drive. She’s beautiful! She’s our age. She has a boyfriend ... and she said that the Sex Dust” — along with pomegranate seed lube — “got them to be able to enjoy sex despite the fact that her body wasn’t producing any of the hormones enabling her to do so. So the herbs, they work. They all work.” You can now buy them at Urban Outfitters, the Ace Hotel and Net-a-Porter.
While she spoke, Bacon finger-combed her hair, pausing now and then to stare critically at the ends. Incense curled out the window in velvety puffs. When I finished eating the pastries, she unfurled herself from her stool and brought out a second course: cloudlike coconut yogurt sprinkled with bee pollen in a pearlescent stone bowl. Fairy food.
Get the best of the Magazine delivered to your inbox every week, including exclusive feature stories, photography, columns and more.
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
View all New York Times newsletters.
The housekeeper paused near Bacon holding a wispy white garment. “Sucio o limpio?” she asked.
“Sucio,” Bacon said with a smile. The gentle sound of laundry in progress emerged from around a corner.
By the time I left Bacon’s house, I wanted to scrub off my makeup and swaddle myself in white cottons and let my hair tumble down my back in sun-lightened coils like hers. I wanted to move to California and eat bee pollen, even though I think bee pollen tastes like the reptile section at the zoo and California is the state where I was born and spent 18 years plotting my escape from, and it can’t be denied that I benefit strongly from makeup. But all of that was wiped away within minutes of meeting this woman, whose ability to perform every action with charisma — whether pouring coconut milk into a pot or requesting a strategy meeting with her staff — seemed a direct result of her dietary choices. I understand that Bacon’s success is a product of ambition, luck, privilege and stamina. So why did I covertly order a 16-ounce sack of bee pollen from Amazon on my phone during a three-minute break in our conversation? The answer is obvious: Bacon is a lifestyle guru, and this is what lifestyle gurus do. They insist on a connection between what you buy and who you are. And then they sell you stuff. If they are Bacon, they also pronounce the word guru “goo-doo,” in what I can only assume is the authentic manner.
The Melrose location of Moon Juice is right down the street from the Marc Jacobs and Alexander McQueen stores. “Welcome to the Moon Kingdom of Edible Alchemy,” it says on the wall. “Thrive Cosmically!” The space is sun-soaked, flower-filled and incalculably expensive. I mean this literally: I was unable to calculate, standing at the register, how crackers and a bottle of juice could total $15. I felt that if I took away the crackers, I might still be charged $15, and that if I added a coconut yogurt, the total might leap to $50. The saleswoman who rang me up approved of my drink choice (Golden Tonic with Moon Dust). “This one is — ” She shook her head, wordless. “You can feel the medicine working in you.” Like Bacon, she wore head-to-toe white, with billowing culottes. I went outside with my juice and sat at a table, watching the saleswoman straighten bottles of Enzymatic Tonic and Gracious Greens.
An employee poked her head out the door, holding a phone. “Hey! Are you Milky?” she asked.
“Molly.”
Advertisement
“Ha, ha, autocorrect.” She glanced down at her phone. “Amanda’s running just a few minutes late — she’ll be here soon.”
I sipped my Moon-Dusted recovery nectar and gnawed a packet of fermented seed crisps. They smelled like tree bark. Here, about a dozen miles from Bacon’s home, the only sound was of lawns being mowed. This lightly accessorized silence is the sonic backdrop of L.A.’s expensive neighborhoods. Women with Goyard and Mansur Gavriel bags slid in and out of the shop. I eavesdropped on three customers arguing about whether a peanut was a fruit, a vegetable or a seed.
Around 11 a.m., Bacon arrived in white denim overalls and Céline sunglasses to test formulas with the company’s in-house herbalist, Blaire Edwards. Before the tasting, she darted around the store, repositioning a cluster of skin products and switching the electricity back on when it unexpectedly shut off. From a back room, Edwards fetched tasting supplies and set them up on a table outside the store. The table was within inches of customers, and Bacon voted to drag it 10 feet away, beyond earshot. “I feel like customers enjoying our current formulas don’t need to hear about the new formulas,” she said. “It could cause anxiety.” At the relocated table, Edwards set out baggies of brown powders labeled in Sharpie marker. She mixed a powder into a cup of water and handed it to her boss.
“Is that three grams?” Bacon asked.
“Yes, madame,” Edwards replied.
Bacon sipped the brown liquid thoughtfully. “I like it,” she said. “My only thought is, less stevia.” She passed the cup to me. “You’re about to get really high.” I swallowed the potion. It was like mild Ovaltine mixed with floor sweepings. When frothed with chai tea, coconut milk and ghee in one of the store’s $6 lattes, it would be scrumptious.
“These are literally ancient herbs,” Edwards said. “This isn’t something Amanda made up out of thin air.” She mixed another sample in a cup while Bacon took calls, greeted fans, sniffed samples and arranged a conversation with a vendor. She possesses a curious quality I’ve seen in other executives: a tendency toward extreme distraction coupled with the ability to laser in on a single task. She is either doing a million things or one thing, but never any number of things in between.
This quality of scattered orchestration is illustrated in “The Moon Juice Cookbook,” which opens its first chapter with a photograph of Bacon kneeling on a shaggy rug strewn with rosebuds and raw almonds. She is surrounded by crystals, a conch shell, an avocado, a flowering shrub, a string of beads and a sculpted owl. Her head is bowed in what looks like reverence. In her hands is an upside-down bundle of calla lilies. The photograph has been styled minutely, but it is hard to extract meaning from the picture. The filmy white garb, the glistening avocado, the melting calla lilies — all arrayed in Edenic plenitude — add up to an alluring, sensory glamour. When you sprinkle Beauty Dust on your almond-milk latte, this is what you are summoning.
Or you might be summoning exactly the opposite. We tend to think of “wellness” as the province of swoony liberal elites, but it does, in fact, blossom at both cultural poles. The far-right conspiracy theorist and radio host Alex Jones sells some of the same supplements as Moon Juice on his Infowars website. Jones’s organic fair-trade coffee can be purchased in an “Immune Support” variety that includes cordyceps and reishi mushroom extracts; Moon Juice sells cordyceps and reishi powders with similar claims attached. The “Super Female Vitality” supplement at the Infowars shop shares a number of ingredients with the Moon Juice Dusts: maca, epimedium, shilajit. Alex Jones and Amanda Chantal Bacon each sell probiotics. They each warn against the encroachment of “toxins.” Bacon has a recipe for strawberry milk with drops of colloidal silver in it; Alex Jones pushes tiny bottles of colloidal silver online for $19.95. Perhaps the biggest difference between the two purveyors is context. Alex Jones sells his merchandise alongside tactical body armor and Trump shirts; Bacon sells hers next to chia pudding.
What unifies the two is the subtext of their pitches — a seeming conviction that widespread forces are acting on benighted consumers, who can thwart harm only by venturing to the fringes and buying non-F.D.A. approved supplements with which to purify themselves. For Jones, the treachery comes in the form of fluoridated water and chemtrails. For Bacon, it’s Western medicine and the standard American diet. One brand is designed to look like an ashram and the other to look like an underground bunker, but you walk away from each with the same conclusion — that the only way out is way, way, out, in a land of mystical mushrooms and miracle herbs. The valor of separatism, after all, is our founding myth.
No place on earth is better suited to nurturing this mass turning-inward than Los Angeles. After I interviewed Bacon at her house the day before, I put my shoes back on and walked downhill toward the ocean, past sage clusters and foamy crests of bougainvillea and signs for a lost cat named India. Dry-cleaning vans made deliveries. Gardeners edged lawns. I passed the most expensive-looking mailbox I’d ever seen, and more varieties of security fence than you could possibly imagine, and houses that looked like every decade’s concept of the future. I was full to the brim of cleansing foods, strolling down a winding road past $6 million homes, each one an island. My sack of bee pollen would arrive in two to four business days.
Molly Young is a contributing writer for the magazine. Her book about New York City, “D C-T!,” written with Joana Avillez, will be published next spring.
Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.
A version of this article appears in print on May 28, 2017, on Page MM28 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Empire of Dust.  Today's Paper|Subscribe


We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Go to Home Page »