Advertisement


 Kevin Roose
 


THE SHIFT
AUG. 30, 2017

Even before the damage from Hurricane Harvey is tallied, big corporations are breaking out their checkbooks.
Chevron, an energy giant with several offices in the Houston area, pledged $1 million to post-Harvey disaster relief efforts. So did Exxon Mobil and Dow Chemical, two companies with facilities hit by the storm. Companies in less regional industries also donated: Amazon offered to match $1 million in donations to the American Red Cross, while Verizon promised $10 million. Walmart, which took a front-line role in the clean-up after Hurricane Katrina, sent truckloads of emergency supplies to the affected area.
In all, corporations have pledged more than $65 million to help clean up the wreckage from Harvey, according to a Wednesday morning estimate by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
That is an impressive figure, and a sign that corporations are capable of stepping up in a crisis. Hurricane Harvey may be one of the costliest natural disasters in American history, according to initial forecasts. Moody’s Analytics has estimated that the storm’s damage may be as much as $50 billion, though it is hard to know at such an early stage.
Advertisement
As Houston recovers, its business community should feel especially compelled to help. That is partly because Houston and the surrounding area, as well as the state of Texas, have been generous to big business in recent years, showering companies with tax breaks, subsidies and other perks in an effort to keep them happy and create new jobs. Houston has benefited from the presence of large corporations, adding thousands of jobs and becoming one of the fastest-growing cities in America. But those companies have benefited, too — sometimes to the tune of hundreds of millions of dollars.
Advertisement
The help Houston has given businesses over the years raises an important question: What is the moral obligation of big companies — especially those that have benefited from a region’s largess — after such a major disaster?
Bob Mitchell, the president of the Bay Area Houston Economic Partnership, an organization that represents local businesses, told me that Houston’s big businesses are generally “very supportive” of the local community. But he said the hurricane’s aftermath would offer the true test.
“What’s going to happen in the weeks and months to come?” Mr. Mitchell asked. “To me, that’s more important than what’s happening right this minute.”
Business leaders have talked a lot lately about civic responsibility. Numerous executives condemned President Trump’s inflammatory comments about the racially motivated violence in Charlottesville, Va., this month, and several corporate leaders, including Tim Cook, Apple’s chief executive, have urged companies to exercise “moral responsibility” for helping the communities around them.
The donations announced for Harvey relief are generous by the standards of corporate philanthropy. Some of the donations are smaller, though, than the amounts many companies have gotten from the region’s generous economic development programs.
Chevron has received $3 million from the Texas Enterprise Fund, a statewide grant program designed to attract business investment and incentivize job creation in the state. Last year, Houston’s city council signed off on a $6.5 million tax break for Fairway Energy Partners, which planned to build underground oil storage facilities. Harris County agreed last year to give Amazon a 10-year, $1.8 million discount on its property tax bill for building a 855,000-square-foot warehouse.

            These companies are among the businesses that have their headquarters in Houston or have a major presence in the city.        
A Chevron spokeswoman said that the company “is proud to have created jobs that added millions of dollars in economic benefit to Houston and the State of Texas.”
Advertisement
Many state and local governments have offered lavish incentives to corporations to attract new business and create jobs. The most notable recent example was Wisconsin’s eye-popping gift of $3 billion in tax credits to Foxconn, the Taiwanese electronics manufacturer.
Still, Houston’s generosity stands out. Some of the biggest gifts have come under a program known as the Texas Economic Development Act, which lets companies apply for property tax exemptions if they promise to create high-paying jobs. The program, which has run up a total lifetime cost of roughly $7 billion since 2002, has benefited dozens of corporations in the Houston area. According to an analysis by the Houston Business Journal, more than $2 billion in tax breaks given under the program have gone to corporations in and around Houston, including Dow Chemical, which has gotten a total of roughly $443 million in such breaks, and Exxon Mobil, which has saved nearly $200 million.
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
View all New York Times newsletters.
Supporters of corporate incentives say that the handouts often pay for themselves by bringing good jobs that might not otherwise arrive. And while some research suggests that these perks don’t actually persuade corporations to move, it is true that Houston’s local economy has seen a bump in the kinds of highly-paid jobs that these firms can bring.
But the incentives also help corporate bottom lines. And after a major disaster like Harvey, it seems worth reminding companies that they have flourished, in part, thanks to the Houston area’s generosity.
“Those corporations ought to feel some additional obligations, but we’ll see,” said Ben Means, a law professor at the University of South Carolina who studies corporate governance. “It’s not because there’s a quid pro quo. They’ve been part of the community, and they have the capacity to help, and they ought to use their resources in socially constructive ways.”
Exxon Mobil, in an email, said: “In 2016, together with employees and retirees, the ExxonMobil Foundation and Exxon Mobil Corporation contributed more than $25 million in charitable donations to organizations in the greater Houston area.”
Disaster relief isn’t limited to the private sector, of course. Billions of dollars in federal, state and local government money will also be needed to help the area recover from the flooding and other damage. Big businesses, which often have valuable supplies and resources, can still play a useful role. Corporations with offices in and around Houston can provide temporary housing to displaced residents, help transport supplies to flooded areas and offer support to small and medium-size local businesses. Some could also chip in on big infrastructure projects, such as fortified levees, that would help protect the region from future storms.
These are still early days, of course, and history tells us that both damages and donation totals are likely to rise in the coming days. By the time Hurricane Katrina’s damage was tallied, Exxon Mobil had contributed more than $7 million to relief efforts, and BP had contributed $10 million.
“It’s the responsibility for industry to provide leadership and resources for recovery,” said Sam Brody, a flood expert and professor at Texas A&M University at Galveston. “It’s not just their facilities. It’s their communities they need to look out for.”
Advertisement
It’s easy to be cynical about the idea of corporate philanthropy, especially in a time of disaster, when companies stand to burnish their images by giving back. But corporations helping Houston recover from the storm’s effects aren’t just acting altruistically or buffing their reputations. They are holding up their end of the deals they made, in which they got financial breaks in exchange for investing in local communities.
That investment has never been more vital than now, as companies weigh the responsibility of staying to help Houston versus the benefits of moving to less-waterlogged areas.
“If those corporations stick around more than they would have otherwise,” Mr. Means said, “that will tell us that these investments in attracting businesses are worthwhile.”
A version of this article appears in print on August 31, 2017, on Page B1 of the New York edition with the headline: Will Big Business Repay Houston’s Generosity?.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
See More »
Go to Home Page »