PAID FOR AND POSTED BY COLUMBIA BUSINESS SCHOOL
Tiffany tse has made a promise to her father react-text: 36  — that one day she will lead the family business. Her parents are Chinese immigrants who
 moved to Hawaii in the 1970s with meager means. Her father sold beads and other small
 goods, eventually turning that into a successful wholesale fine jewelry operation.
 /react-text 
Tse, though proud of what her family had accomplished, initially didn’t have any interest
 in joining her parents’ company. She grew to love the work, though, and what’s more, she
 came to respect the tenacity and loyalty of the employees who helped her parents build
 their business.

“They built this small company that fed so many families,” Tse says. “I felt I should take it
 to the next level.”

Tse began taking over the Hawaii-based company, DC Inc., in 2010. Even though she had no
 formal business experience or training, she more than doubled the company’s revenue. In 2013,
 after she received her Graduate Gemologist degree from the Gemological Institute of America,
 she opened a retail store, Demi Couleur Jewellery, in Dubai. In 2015, she co-founded Jordana
 Jewelry, a retail store in Zhaoqing, China, near the company’s manufacturing facilities. The
 idea was to bring shoppers closer to the source of the handcrafted jewelry.

However, she knew that before she could fulfill the promise she’d made to her dad to fully take
 over the company, she needed more training in business. She decided to go back to school and
 pursue her Executive M.B.A., allowing her to hone her business skills and meet ambitious people
 while running her business at the same time.

Like Tse, many business professionals consider it crucial to surround themselves with people
 who can challenge their views and expand their thinking. There’s no shortage of brilliant
 minds in the business capital of the world, which is why Tse and other working executives
 enroll in Columbia Business School in the heart of New York City. At Columbia Business
 School, they can get a great education and meet other amazing thinkers who can become
 mentors, colleagues and potential partners.

“For me, the first step toward growing was to learn about the things you don’t think about
 when you start a business,” Tse says. “But it’s also about learning from others, too. In my
 class, everyone came from a different background, and learning from these people has been
 invaluable.”

Geoffrey Pope’s pathway to business school was also built on a promise to his family. react-text: 90  He grew up in Detroit and was raised by his mom and grandmother. From early on, they instilled
 the value of hard work and gave him as many opportunities as they could to help him succeed.
 “They did everything to make sure I was going down the right track,” he says. He promised
 them he’d make them proud.
 /react-text 
And that’s exactly what he did. In high school, Pope excelled at track and football,
 eventually landing at Howard University, where NFL scouts got wind of the speedy cornerback.
 He spent his rookie year with the New York Giants, where he achieved something he had only
 dreamed of before: He won a Super Bowl. “That was a dream come true,” he says.

He played for another three years before retiring in 2010 after sustaining an injury.
 Fortunately, Pope had always wanted to enter the business world after his football career
 was over. “Everything revolves around business,” he says. “There are so many facets, whether
 it’s marketing, strategy, finance and investing. I knew that having a superior business
 acumen would be the way to go.”

One of his NFL mentors suggested that he focus on starting a career in insurance. Pope retired
 not long after the financial crisis in 2008, and insurance, his mentor reasoned, might be a
 good route to take. It also allowed him to tap into his passion for entrepreneurship: He was
 able to develop his own book of business and manage his own clients.

He worked his way up from account specialist to vice president of USI Insurance Services,
 where he now manages a team of 10. Still, he felt he had much more to learn about business.

Business school, he thought, would help him get a leg up on his peers. It would bolster his
 entrepreneurial skills, too: While he plans to stay in insurance, he’s also starting a new
 business this summer with two Columbia Business School classmates. It’s an online community —
 Left Center Right —
 where people of all political stripes can gather to talk without the fear of social media
 backlash. “It allows people from all walks of life to voice their opinions in a manner that
 opens up dialogues from the political left, center and right,” he says.

For Pope, who lives in Philadelphia, enrolling in Columbia Business School’s executive M.B.A
 program was a no-brainer. He’s always loved New York and thought the school’s stellar
 reputation, along with the opportunity to learn from top business minds, would give him the
 edge he needed.

Like teammates on the gridiron, his classmates at Columbia Business School have pushed him to
 improve in many ways. “They’ll get on the phone with me and say, ‘This is my opinion. Here’s
 what I think. This is what you can do to make what you’re doing better,’” he explains.

He believes this kind of interaction has already made him a better leader and manager. “You
 can see the difference in my conversations with clients,” he says. “I used to focus on the
 client’s business and what programs we can implement to reduce risk. Now my conversations are
 centered around industry and market trends, which is unlike other brokers in the region.”

Business school also gave him other opportunities that he hoped would make him stand out. And
 after two years in the program — he graduated in May — he’s confident that he is a
 better-rounded businessman. He recently finished a white paper on the impact that interest rates
 have on insurance premiums, real estate valuations and capital expenditures with one of his
 Columbia Business School professors. “My hope is that this paper, as well as other projects,
 will help me differentiate myself as an insurance professional in a rapidly changing
 industry,” he says.

Jeffrey Casserino’s route to business school began with a passion for architecture and design. react-text: 135  Growing up, he used to spend hours with his grandfather creating structures out of Lincoln
 Logs and even tracing floor plans and elevations from design magazines. By his senior year in
 high school, he knew that architectural design was going to be his life’s work. “I wasn’t
 focused on salary. I didn’t care about the market. I just loved how it felt to design,” he
 says.
 /react-text 
In 2012, Casserino moved from Rochester to New York City to join TAD Associates, a design
 firm that focuses on the intersection of digital content experiences and architectural space.
 Initially, business school wasn’t part of the plan — he always thought of himself as the
 creative guy — but the more his role expanded, the more he realized the importance of having
 strong business knowledge.

“I needed to know where and how I should focus my energy,” he says. “I wanted to learn how to
 turn ideas into reality by understanding the process of taking a creative thought and testing
 it against the variables that can prove or disprove merit.”

He chose Columbia Business School because he wanted to learn from other successful
 entrepreneurs and executives, and he knew that he wouldn’t be able to get in front of as
 many high-caliber faculty and speakers anywhere else.

Casserino, who graduated in May, knew business school would be valuable, but he never
 anticipated just how life changing it would be. Early on in the Executive M.B.A. program,
 he heard fellow classmate Raphael Ison, a vice president at JPMorgan Chase, give an overview
 in class about an idea for a new app. Ison wanted to create an internal networking tool for
 groups to help individuals better understand who’s around them and how they can work
 together.

Casserino was intrigued by the idea and approached Ison with thoughts on how they could move
 forward. They immediately saw the potential of working together. “We have a shared passion
 for solving the same problems,” Casserino says. The two initially hit it off after taking one
 of Columbia Business School’s weeklong international seminars together in Tel Aviv. “I saw
 that our goals and values were aligned,” he says.

The two developed the app, called Within, during the second half of the program, and now that
 they’ve both graduated, they’re ready to release it. They’ve been testing iterations with
 their fellow students and plan to release the full version this summer. “We’d then love to
 open it up to different groups,” he says. “It’s going to help a lot of people find each other
 based on shared interests and goals for the future.”

Casserino’s M.B.A. education has helped in his current job, too. At TAD, he’s been able to
 combine his creative and business skills in ways he’d never imagined. “I didn’t think the
 business school curriculum would be as applicable as it is,” he says. “In some ways, it’s a
 complete mind-set shift — the curriculum makes you aware of the complexity of a broad range
 of issues but at the same time teaches processes to help you clearly analyze, strategize and
 solve for them.”

Raphael Ison took a different road to business school than his business partner. react-text: 176  He enlisted in the United States Marine Corps Reserve at the age of 17 and served a mix of
 reserve and active-duty deployments around the world, including humanitarian missions to
 Ghana. He credits the Marine Corps with giving him the discipline and motivation to seek out
 the most difficult challenges. “The Marine Corps was one of the most challenging and
 rewarding experiences, and I hoped to find something similar in the civilian world. The
 camaraderie, training and experience was the best of its kind,” Ison says.
 /react-text 
While in the Marine Corps Reserve, Ison completed his undergraduate degree. He then began his
 corporate career as a first year staffer at Deloitte & Touche, working his way up to be a
 manager who reviews clients’ financial statements and makes sure they are in compliance with
 applicable standards. “Instead of identifying issues with my client’s financial statements
 and reporting process, I wanted to help them on the front end to think strategically about how
 to avoid those issues,” he says.

So in 2015, Ison applied to the Executive M.B.A. program at Columbia. He chose the Executive M.B.A. program
 because it gave him the flexibility to continue working in the industry while also getting a
 quality education. “The reputation of the program, culture of the community and location of
 the school were reasons why I did not apply anywhere else,” he explains. Ison notes
 similarities between the rigor of Columbia and the Marine Corps, and the need to lean on
 your team for help to achieve more: “The program was intense, but there were people and
 resources to turn to,” Ison says.

Learning how to solve problems strategically and to be entrepreneurial were on top of Ison’s
 priority list. And he wasted no time in applying lessons learned during his studies. “Thinking about
 how I could maximize this special opportunity at Columbia, I realized there was a need and
 opportunity to create an exclusive collaboration platform specific for this program and
 others similar to it,” he says.

Since Casserino and Ison partnered on Ison’s idea, two other students have joined them. The
 four now are excited to release their product to the Columbia Executive M.B.A. community. “Looking back
 at my time in Columbia, the stars could not have aligned any better,” Ison says. “I met some
 of the best people who challenged my thinking and helped me turn an idea into a real product.
 I am better able to connect the dots and better equipped in realizing opportunities.”

It may seem like the connections mentioned above react-text: 197  — which all took place at Columbia Business School — are random. But they’re not, says Kelley
 Blanco, assistant dean of Columbia Business School’s Executive M.B.A. programs and students.
 /react-text 
The school fosters and nurtures connections to help students succeed in the business world.
 During the first week on campus, students are deliberately broken into small groups based on
 their professional and personal diversity, which supports the foundation of the learning
 experience.

“These relationships develop quickly and last well after school ends — the knowledge gained
 from these peer-learning groups never disappears,” Blanco says. “Whether it’s guest lecturers
 or fellow students, you’re often going deep into these relationships,” she adds. “People go
 into business together, and they’ve helped each other advance in their careers.”

As successful as Tse, Pope, Casserino and Ison have been, they know their stories are only
 getting started. They plan to take what they’ve learned and the connections they’ve made to
 grow their companies — and themselves.

For Tse, the payoff from her schooling has manifested itself in various ways. “What I’m
 learning is so crucial to what I’m doing right now,” she says. “It’s changed my outlook on
 everything, professionally and personally. I’m a better executive and a better person because
 of it.”

The news and editorial staffs of The New York Times had no role in this post's preparation.
Go to Home Page »