Advertisement
Follow Us:
Get the Upshot in your Inbox



Emily Badger



@emilymbadger

AUG. 16, 2017

Paul Chabot, a Republican, ran in the fall for Congress from a part of California’s Inland Empire that was once reliably Republican. That was the best way, he figured, to revive a community he remembered from his childhood as being safer, more prosperous, with better public schools and less liberal politics. It was his final effort trying to make things work in California.
Mr. Chabot lost by 12 points. By Thanksgiving, he, his wife, Brenda, and their four children were touring North Texas in a rented S.U.V. looking for a new home.
In the language of political science, they were sorting. The Chabots left a part of the country where they believed they no longer fit in as conservatives for a new community where they felt sure they would.
“I see it even more boldly — as escaping,” Mr. Chabot said from McKinney, Tex., where the family settled this year.
Their migration is precisely the kind Bill Bishop described in his 2008 book “The Big Sort,” which posited that Americans have been self-selecting since the 1970s into like-minded communities that are less likely to hold competitive elections. San Bernardino County, which the Chabots left behind, leaned Democratic in the last three presidential elections. Collin County, Tex., where they landed, has gone Republican the last 13.
Advertisement
In the decade since Mr. Bishop’s book came out, researchers have intensely debated his thesis about how sorting happens, and the extent to which it happens at all. Do Americans really have politics in mind when they decide where to live? Is it possible that people who move for other reasons could bolster geographic polarization anyway? Or is today’s political map — Democrats in Los Angeles, Republicans in the Texas suburbs — more a product of voting patterns changing in place than of voters changing addresses? (Donald J. Trump’s win in Michigan, for example, wasn’t caused by lots of Republicans moving there.)
Advertisement
Mr. Chabot is saying out loud what is more often subtext in this debate. If there’s little evidence Americans think of moving as a political act — and even Mr. Bishop argued that sorting arises from behavior that’s not explicitly political — Mr. Chabot has declared that it is. Since arriving in Texas, he has even started a business on that premise.
While others have mused about relocating liberals to red states to tip their elections, Mr. Chabot’s company, Conservative Move, wants to help conservatives migrate to solidly conservative places. He has turned the Big Sort into a real estate strategy.
“A hundred people have talked to me going, ‘Oh my goodness, why didn’t I think of that?’ ” said Derek Baker, a Texas real estate agent now working with Mr. Chabot. “And I said that, too.” He previously spent 25 years in Washington, D.C., as a lobbyist and conservative congressional staffer, including for Mike Pence, then a congressman.
When Mr. Baker left Capitol Hill for his native Texas in 2011, he researched election results in the previous three presidential races before settling in Collin County, too. Most families he hears from now don’t do that kind of political calculation — and he and Mr. Chabot say they’ve already been contacted by about 2,500 since starting Conservative Move’s website in May.
“They’re not asking me for the percentage breakdown that went for Trump in the last cycle,” Mr. Baker said. “They’re asking for really good schools, a really safe community, an affordable house, low crime and a place to raise their kids. This is the part that gets Paul and I in trouble with liberals and Democrats sometimes, but it’s true: What kinds of policies support those kinds of communities? Conservative policies for the most part.”
Mr. Baker says he is now running custom multiple listing service searches for about a hundred households serious about moving. A dozen families have closed on a new home or are close to it, Mr. Chabot said. He estimates that about three-quarters of the people they’ve heard from live in California, and most are targeting Texas, but also Idaho, Utah, Arizona, South Carolina and Florida. The company, which acts as a real estate referral business funded by a commission on home sales, plans to build a network of politically conservative real estate agents in other conservative parts of the country.
The families that want to follow what the Chabots have done tell only one side of the story, of conservatives uncomfortable in more liberal parts of the country. But their responses give a window into why people might feel compelled to sort. Conservatives have written in that they feel “stifled,” “oppressed,” “trapped,” not “tolerated” and “belittled” in California, a set of terms that might equally describe liberals outnumbered in conservative places.
Advertisement
“It caused me over time to be less vocal about my politics,” said Kevin D. Korenthal, referring to California’s increasingly liberal embrace of immigration, legal marijuana, cap-and-trade and what he calls multiculturalism in schools. Mr. Korenthal’s family moved from Southern California to McKinney this year, after he learned of the Chabots’ move.
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
View all New York Times newsletters.
Mr. Korenthal had been hiding his politics in his home state. “A lot of people, that’s what they have to do in order to survive, to have friendships,” he said.
Constantinos Dracopoulos, who recently took a medical retirement from the Air Force, worked with Mr. Baker to find a home in Garland, Tex., that he will close on at the end of the month. He felt unvalued as a veteran in his native California, where he said people seldom thanked him for his service. Texas has reduced property taxes for disabled veterans and because it has no income tax, doesn’t tax military retirement pay as California does.
“They would give more rights to an illegal immigrant rather than treat their own a lot better,” he said of California’s policies.
The Chabots describe fleeing long commutes, rising gas taxes and unbearable home prices. They were wary of the public schools in California and the potential crime flowing from its overcrowded prisons.
“We tried everything we could in California — we fought and fought and fought,” Mr. Chabot said. “At the end of it, you can’t help people who don’t want to help themselves. A majority of voters have spoken, they wanted a progressive, and that’s what they’ve got. But I’ve got a choice.”
It’s possible that liberals in deep-red America might respond to a parallel offer, a Liberal Move. In a 2014 survey by the Pew Research Center, 50 percent of people who are “consistently conservative” and 35 percent who are “consistently liberal” said it was important to them to live in a place where most people share their political views.
It is less clear, though, how many people actually act on that sentiment. Most movers are primarily concerned with job prospects and affordable housing. Political considerations come later, if at all. And one study, by Jonathan Mummolo and Clayton Nall, argues that it would be hard for most people to sort into places that are more partisan once they’ve satisfied those economic criteria. (If conservatives in California want to move somewhere really red, they can choose from a number of very rural American communities, but the job prospects there aren’t great.)
There is some evidence, though, that people do head for politically like-minded places, even if they don’t think of those moves as political. One study that relied on the voter files of millions of people in seven states, by Wendy Cho, James Gimpel and Iris Hui, found that registered Republican movers show a preference for ZIP codes that are more heavily Republican than the ones they left. Democrats do the same, although to a lesser degree.
Advertisement
Another study, by Ian McDonald, used the Postal Service’s change-of-address database to show that people were more likely to move to congressional districts that matched their self-reported ideology. And researchers at RAND have found that congressional districts (and counties) have become more different from one another over time in ways that suggest “clustering” by people who are similar in their politics, income, education and marriage rates.
The scale of what Mr. Chabot is doing, even if he’s wildly successful, probably won’t alter the political map. And many researchers believe the country remains less divided than Mr. Bishop suggested. But Mr. Chabot’s idea raises the same provocative questions “The Big Sort” did. In the theory of sorting, it is not just Texas that would be changed by this process, but California and other blue places left behind, too.
“If you’re a Democrat and you hear that Paul Chabot wants to move Republicans out of the state, you should be having a party,” Mr. Korenthal said. “This means you’re going to be challenged even less. But is that really good for the state?
“I haven’t gotten anyone to answer that question for me honestly.”
The Upshot provides news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and everyday life. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter. Sign up for our newsletter.
A version of this article appears in print on August 18, 2017, on Page A18 of the New York edition with the headline: Moving Out to Fit In: A New Business of Political Migration.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Go to Home Page »