Advertisement
By MELENA RYZIKMARCH 19, 2018

JUST THE FUNNY PARTS . . . And a Few Hard Truths About Sneaking Into the Hollywood Boys’ Club By Nell Scovell Illustrated. 311 pp. Dey St./Morrow. $27.99.
On the first day that Nell Scovell arrived at her office as a writer on “Late Night With David Letterman,” a new colleague stopped to greet her. They chatted amiably about mutual friends. And then he laid it out: “Before this is over,” he told her, “I will see a tampon fall out of your purse.”
“I felt strangely shaken as he walked away,” Scovell writes in “Just the Funny Parts: … And a Few Hard Truths About Sneaking Into the Hollywood Boys’ Club.” The remark puzzled her for decades. Then, doing research for another book, she learned to identify it not merely as adolescent posturing from a man-child but as what she terms “stereotype threat.”
“When members of a group are made aware of a negative stereotype, they are more likely to conform to that stereotype,” she writes — meaning that, if she believed the bunk that women aren’t funny, the co-worker singling out her gender might have killed her confidence and torpedoed her career. He did neither, though her time on “Letterman” was not a happy one. For that she places the blame on the boss, who later admitted on air that he’d had affairs with underlings. He was far from the only man who helped make the comedy-writing world so hostile to women. In “Just the Funny Parts,” Scovell, whose résumé includes stints on many zeitgeist-y shows, from “The Simpsons” to “Murphy Brown,” catalogs the men who should have been comrades and instead were antagonists. It’s not a short list. Early on, a comedy hero, Garry Shandling, told her, “You write like a guy,” and meant it as a positive.
Advertisement
No moment is too sacred to puncture: Scovell was invited to meet with Joss Whedon, the creator of “Buffy the Vampire Slayer” — then her favorite show on TV — about a staff position. She was 38 weeks pregnant at the interview. “Boy, are you fat,” Whedon said. (His producer followed up with, “Should I put down a tarp?”) She didn’t get the job.
If the sprinkling of sociological terms like “stereotype threat” sounds familiar, it’s because Scovell collaborated with Sheryl Sandberg on her study-laden blockbuster, “Lean In.” Sandberg, the Facebook executive, provides the TED Talk-ready foreword to “Just the Funny Parts,” writing that “whoever said feminists weren’t funny never met Nell.” (At her own mother’s funeral, Scovell, one of five siblings, held up an envelope and announced that it contained “the name of mom’s favorite child.”) A career in the entertainment industry — scaled like a jungle gym, not a ladder — meant Scovell lived “Lean In” long before she wrote it, Sandberg says. “Just the Funny Parts” is a record of her scramble, retrofitted with post-“Lean In” indignation. (She took Shandling’s words as a compliment at first.)
The bar for contemporary women-in-comedy books was set in 2011 with Tina Fey’s “Bossypants,” which managed advice that was both hilarious and accurate — no pigtails or tube tops at the office, no diet foods in meetings and cry at work if you must because “it terrifies everyone.” Scovell’s lessons are less jokey and more emotionally bare; she even confesses a few things that our feminist foremothers have taught us to keep buttoned up — like the lines that she crossed, too — which feels freeing. Over all, though, “Just the Funny Parts” functions best not when Scovell is recounting some backstage encounter on “The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour” or “Newhart” but when she’s rankled. My first laugh came on Page 58, when Scovell, her contributions on a show once again ignored, asks a female co-worker: “Am I corporeal? You can see and hear me, right?”
Advertisement
Gender aside, her comedy bona fides are solid: Scovell is from a large, neurotic, bookish, mercilessly honest — though loving — Jewish family in Massachusetts. She went to Harvard and wrote for Spy magazine. With a few biographical tweaks, she could be Conan O’Brien. (The two intersected as writers on a short-lived ’80s talk show.) In typical overachiever fashion, even her failures — Scovell writes that she was too full of self-doubt to apply for The Harvard Lampoon — led her somewhere: She became a sportswriter for The Boston Globe, then moved to New York and got a staff job at Vanity Fair. But Scovell soon realized that her high-concept style was better suited for TV. “Writing for TV made way more sense than writing for magazines,” she says. “And by sense, I mean money.”
For aspiring writers, the book has just enough practical advice on story pitches and script editing to qualify as a how-to. “When I write, I feel like an optometrist, constantly flipping between lenses and asking: ‘Is this better? Is this?’ Slowly, the work comes into focus,” she explains. An appendix lists all of her jobs, from Lifetime movies to “NCIS,” and, more bracingly for those starting out, the dozens of scripts unproduced over her 30-year career. Along the way, she married an architect and had two sons, and she is brisk about the fact that her husband’s staying at home with the boys — carting them around to sets as she wrote, produced and directed — is what made her employable.
In her 40s and beyond, female executives kept her afloat, she says. Scovell built up a deep network of friends and allies, though strikingly, even in the photos of her gang, she is usually the only woman. The book is laid out like the old joke about the arc of a Hollywood career: Part 1: “Who is Nell Scovell?” Part 2: “Get me Nell Scovell!” Part 3: “Get me a younger, cheaper Nell Scovell!” And finally: “Who is Nell Scovell?”
Just as she is getting to that last stage, however, she meets Sandberg, whose spirit infuses this book: in the references to studies about how men are perceived as confident while women are taught to deflect credit, or in the anecdotes about how Scovell is judged on her presumed emotions rather than her actual abilities. When the two women worked together on “Lean In,” Scovell was overjoyed to find an outlet for her frustration — finally, here was data to back up her sense of inequity! — and for the reader, that emotional shift comes not a moment too soon, as one thing that’s sacrificed in her litany of miscreants is a larger sense of why she loves or even wants a career in entertainment anymore. “Running a show is like being beaten to death with your own dream,” a producer she worked with on the series she created, “Sabrina the Teenage Witch,” says.
There are career high points, too; I would have gladly read another chapter on the feminist platform presented by “Murphy Brown.” But through connections made at Facebook, “Lean In” brings an even more rarefied opportunity: writing jokes for President Obama. Finally, the payoff! Scovell is understandably giddy at crafting one-liners for the White House Correspondents Dinner, to be delivered by the leader of the free world — a man who just happens to know how to land a punch line.
There’s no time to wallow, now, in that era’s ending; there’s too much to fix. Though no doubt Scovell would have had it otherwise, the fact that “Just the Funny Parts” is landing at such a charged moment — when women are exquisitely, bruisingly fed up — may be a stroke of luck. In her introduction, Scovell does joke about calling the book “Just the Angry and Bitter Parts,” but says she hoped not to outright discourage young writers. Besides, she adds, “that would be an eight-volume set.”
Melena Ryzik is a culture reporter at The Times.
Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter, sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.
A version of this review appears in print on March 25, 2018, on Page BR12 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: Not-So-Funny Business.  Today's Paper|Subscribe


We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
See More »
We earn an affiliate commission with each book purchase, which helps support our journalism at The New York Times.
Go to Home Page »