Advertisement
With Andrew Ross Sorkin
NOV. 27, 2017

Good Monday evening. We’re closely watching reactions to the Republican tax plans, the Koch brothers’ role helping to finance Meredith’s purchase of Time Inc., and the leadership battle at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. (Want this in your own email inbox each morning? Here’s the sign-up.)
Republicans’ latest stab at tax reform would likely be a boon to business moguls. But not everyone is interested.
Ken Griffin of Citadel said that he doesn’t need his taxes cut that much. Here’s what he said earlier today:
“You would usually reserve tax reform of this nature for right in the midst of a recession,” the billionaire said in an interview with CNBC’s Leslie Picker. “Do we need to cut taxes as much as we are? Probably not. Do we need to reform taxes, simply taxes, and keep America competitive. Absolutely.”
And Randy Levine, the president of the Yankees, wrote an open letter to President Trump on the conservative news site Newsmax calling for big changes to the proposed tax plans. From his missive:
When you ran and won, you ran on draining the swamp, not giving new life to it.
You ran on tax cuts, not on the swamp’s idea of tax reform where special interests win.
This is a plan that helps Wall Street, hedge funds, private equity managers, real estate and oil and gas partnerships and individuals who disguise income as profits or distributions.
It’s worth noting a couple of things:
• Mr. Griffin might enjoy slightly less of a tax break than other financiers, since both the House and Senate plans would restrict carried interest’s lower tax rate to investments held for at least three years. But as CNBC previously pointed out, hedge fund managers generally don’t get much carry in the first place.
• Mr. Levine describes himself as a longstanding backer of Mr. Trump.
Other members of the 1 percent are unhappy with the plan because they may lose out. Economists at Goldman Sachs have estimated that as many as 4 percent of New York State’s top earners could relocate because of a potential limit to deductions for state and local taxes. Bloomberg took a look at more of the efforts by officials in low-tax areas like Florida to lure unhappy New Yorkers thinking of tax-related moves.
During a conference call with analysts on Monday to discuss his company’s $2.8 billion deal for Time Inc., Meredith C.E.O. Steve Lacy said of the Koch brothers’ financing role:
“And their desire to be passive and not require a board seat and observer rights and all sorts of other things that we learned as we went through the process, without a doubt, made the offer from the Koch equity division of their company the most attractive.”
But many in the media world have questioned whether the brothers actually will have no influence at Time Inc. publications. Among them are former editors at Time Inc. itself.
Advertisement
Politico’s Michael Calderone spoke to Richard Stengel, a former editor of Time, and John Huey, a former editor-in-chief of Time Inc.:

            Ex-Time editor @stengel: "It would be naive to think that just because the Koch brothers don't have a seat on the board that they wouldn't wield some kind of editorial influence.”        

            Ex-Time Inc EIC @johnwhuey: "It’s difficult to believe the Kochs would pay a premium to buy into the print media model without the hope that they can harness Time and Fortune to further their agenda."        
Other billionaires have invested in media properties without using them as a vehicle for their political beliefs. Peter Kafka of Recode points to Warren Buffett, who owns the Omaha World-Herald. (And we should note that billionaire Carlos Slim remains an investor in The New York Times Company.)
Advertisement
One group that’s not asking questions about the Meredith deal is Time Inc.’s coterie of shareholders. Shares in the magazine publisher jumped 9 percent to $18.42 this morning on news of the transaction.
After serving as the White House’s communications director for 10 days, Anthony Scaramucci has announced nebulous plans for some kind of media venture. Now he can add “potential litigant” to his résumé as well.
Lawyers for Mr. Scaramucci have threatened to sue Tufts University’s student newspaper and an op-ed writer over two columns that called the financier “unethical.” In a letter to The Tufts Daily, Mr. Scaramucci’s counsel demanded an apology for what they asserted were “false and defamatory statements” and a retraction of the two pieces. Otherwise, the former financier would “be forced to take further legal action.”
Mr. Scaramucci defended himself, repeatedly, on Twitter.

            This is a dishonest tweet. I asked for an apology. Plain and simple. In our country defamation comes with its consequences. https://t.co/Cs64CtrV86 
Tufts has postponed a speaking event featuring Mr. Scaramucci scheduled for later today, citing “legal matters.”
Deep cut: The conflict even revived Mr. Scaramucci’s once mildly famous quarrel with the financial columnist Felix Salmon:

            I didn’t realize you were still alive? What happened to your career? https://t.co/Dtongs4v0L 
The deputy director of the financial consumer watchdog, Leandra English has sued President Trump over who will lead the agency on an interim basis. But for now, both Ms. English and Mick Mulvaney, whom the White House has picked as acting director, have shown up for work, according to CNN.
In an apparent effort to win over his potential new colleagues, Mr. Mulvaney even brought a present.

            Mulvaney brings donuts to his first day at CFPB. Couldn’t hurt. pic.twitter.com/BpKJ2nd1L0 
The conflict will ultimately come down to which statute applies to replacing now-departed director Richard Cordray: the Dodd-Frank law that created the C.F.P.B., or the Federal Vacancies Reform Act.
Noah Feldman, a professor of constitutional and international law at Harvard University, argues at Bloomberg View that Ms. Engish’s “suit is a partisan maneuver that will detract from the seriousness of the effort to keep executive power in check where it matters.”
“As a general matter, the Constitution expects the president to be able to appoint the heads of agencies in the executive branch...The idea that Trump wouldn’t be able to name his own acting director of the CFPB therefore contradicts basic principles of democratic legitimacy. It’s at best a bug in a complex statutory scheme, not a feature. There is simply no good structural, logical, or constitutional reason why the dead hand of President Barack Obama’s administration should continue to guide the CFPB once Cordray is gone.”
Advertisement
Asked by NBC News whether he had legitimate authority over the C.F.P.B., Mr. Mulvaney said, “Yes, yes I do.”

@MickMulvaneyOMB sitting in director's office. Already hard at work as acting director at cfpb. pic.twitter.com/BKISYfduY7 
Extra credit: The International Business Times reports that a longtime aide to Mr. Mulvaney, Natalee Binkholder, now represents the bank Santander — which has been under scrutiny by the agency over its auto lending practices. Ms. Binkholder worked for Mr. Mulvaney until earlier this year.
Now that Meredith has officially announced a $2.8 billion deal to buy the beleaguered publisher — with a $650 million assist from the Koch brothers — the media industry is asking which parts will stay and which parts will go.
Analysts had long seen Meredith, which publishes Family Circle and Better Homes and Gardens, as being most interested in People, Time Inc.’s most profitable title. The more news-focused publications upon which Time Inc. was built, including its namesake magazine and Fortune, have traditionally been less of a focus for Meredith.
If Meredith decides to sell those news publications, who would buy them? The smart money is on a vanity buyer — perhaps from the same universe of investors who are pursuing Rolling Stone, which we hear could be sold as soon as this week.
The Koch angle 
Take note of this disclaimer about Koch Industries’ private equity arm:
KED will not have a seat on the Meredith board and will have no influence on Meredith’s editorial or managerial operations. KED’s noncontrolling, preferred equity investment underscores a strong belief in Meredith’s strength as a business operator, its strategies, and its ability to unlock significant value from the Time Inc. acquisition.
A spokesman for Koch Industries told the NYT that the financing was a “passive investment.” But that hasn’t stopped people from wondering if the prominent donors to conservative causes would somehow use Time Inc. as another vehicle for their political activism. One possibility, according to the NYT: tying Time Inc.’s consumer data with the voter information held by the Koch-owned data analytics company i360.
The Trump angle
There was controversy over President Trump’s assertion that he turned down the chance to be named Time’s Person of the Year and the magazine’s rebuttal.
Critics corner
• Peter Kafka writes, “The main question remains: Why do the Kochs want to get into the publishing business?” (Recode)
Advertisement
• Jennifer Saba writes of the transaction, “It’s a lucky break because a go-it-alone strategy looked doomed. Bountiful cost savings, however, will go to the buyer and its new billionaire backers.” (Breakingviews)
Extra credit: Meet Reade Brower, the man who controls Maine’s newspaper industry.
Is it Leandra English, the deputy director of the bureau and the chosen successor of the now-departed chief, Rich Cordray? Or is it Mick Mulvaney, appointed by Mr. Trump to lead the agency on an interim basis?
Ms. English sued the president late last night to prevent Mr. Mulvaney from taking over. But the C.F.P.B.’s own general counsel, Mary McLeod, backed a legal memo from the Justice Department supporting the White House move.
At stake is the effectiveness of a bureau that Mr. Trump has publicly derided:
The stakes were already high. Mr. Mulvaney is on record as having called the bureau a “sad, sick joke,” leading many to suspect that, should he take charge, would seek to unwind Obama-era initiatives meant to protect financial consumers — and that have infuriated the banking and lending industries.
Now those same industries are worried about the uncertainty that has descended upon the bureau. Coverage by Yuka Hayashi of the WSJ:
“If there has been one consistent criticism of the CFPB, it’s a lack of predictability, and we are now left with the greatest uncertainty since the bureau was established,” said Ben Olson, a Buckley Sandler lawyer and a former CFPB official who advises financial companies.
In a potential attempt to win over C.F.P.B. staffers, Mr. Mulvaney brought in Dunkin’ Donuts this morning.
While the Justice Department battles AT&T over its proposed takeover of Time Warner amid questions about political motivation, Mr. Trump weighed in again on CNN:
That’s when the Senate Budget Committee is scheduled to vote on moving the proposal to the floor. Axios notes that two undecided Senate Republicans, Ron Johnson of Wisconsin and Bob Corker of Tennessee, sit on that committee.
Our columnist Andrew Ross Sorkin and his Times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines — and the power-brokers who shape them.
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
View all New York Times newsletters.
But the big question remains: Can the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, prevent no more than two of his colleagues from voting against the tax bill? Mr. Johnson and Steve Daines of Montana worry that the current legislation favors big corporations over small businesses. Susan Collins of Maine has expressed worry over health care and deductions for state and local taxes.
Senate negotiators are weighing changes to please those holdouts, according to the WaPo. But Axios notes that the prevailing wisdom in Washington is that Republicans’ worries about failing to pass a tax change could push potential dissenters into backing the legislation.
Advertisement
The tax flyaround
• A new analysis of the Senate plan by the Congressional Budget Office finds that, by 2027, households earning less than $75,000 would be worse off, and that the proposal would add $1.4 trillion to the national debt. (WaPo)
• Republicans worry that the two Goldman Sachs alumni selling the tax bill for the White House, Gary Cohn and Steven Mnuchin, have not been effective pitchmen to middle-class Americans. (Politico)
• Economists at Goldman reckon that the current tax proposals could prod about 2 percent to 4 percent of top earners in New York City to move elsewhere. And it could lower home prices by restricting deductions for property taxes.
• The Communications Workers of America union has asked several companies that employ its members to promise to give workers a pay increase if the cut in the corporate tax rate goes through. (NYT)
The digital currency rose as high as $9,682 this morning, as part of its lightning-fast ascent in value in recent weeks. A month ago, it was trading below $6,000.
So far, Bitcoin observers are bullish on a continued jump in value because of investor FOMO:
• Chris Weston, the chief market strategist of IG Group, told clients today, “Bitcoin has seen another frenzy of buying as the fear-of-missing-out trade bites even harder.”
• Shane Chanel of ASR Wealth Advisers told CNN Money that he thinks the currency could hit $12,000, adding, “Greed will continue to drive the price over the short term.”
About those initial coin offerings …
Joe Grundfest, a former Securities and Exchange Commission official who now teaches at Stanford, thinks that the virtual currency sales being held by scores of companies are potentially rife with fraud and wants the agency to regulate them. Here’s what he told Nathaniel Popper of the NYT:
“I.C.O.s represent the most pervasive, open and notorious violation of federal securities laws since the Code of Hammurabi.”
Foot traffic at brick-and-mortar stores was down 4 percent from the period a year ago, according to RetailNext. But online sales rose yet again, amid a battle between Amazon and Walmart — and things were anything but quiet at the warehouses that service e-commerce operations.
Advertisement
From Sarah Nassauer and Laura Stevens of the WSJ:
On Black Friday, “we actually got so many orders that we jammed up our conveyor” belt, said Ilias Simpson, who manages two Kentucky warehouses where logistics firm Radial Inc. handles e-commerce fulfillment for Aéropostale Inc. and other retailers.
Extra credit, retail edition
• Sarah Halzack writes, “If I were a retailer, I would tune out the funeral dirges being played for Black Friday and listen instead to what I assume your sales numbers are telling you: The occasion is still critically important.” (Gadfly)
• Jeff Bezos’s net worth surpassed $100 billion on Black Friday. He’s the first person to hit those heights since Bill Gates did in 1999. (Bloomberg)
• A tale of two Sears locations, one representing its dismal present and one marking what the retailer hopes is its brighter future. (NYT)
• Amazon is courting vendors in India to sell on its platform. (NYT)
This week, Barron’s takes a look at how markets in China, Russia and India have been outperforming the United States:
America first? Not when it comes to world stocks.
In a year full of political and economic drama, emerging markets have outpaced an aging bull market in the U.S. over the last 12 months. Still, the prospect of Beijing wielding a heavier hand in Chinese companies and economic reforms in India potentially slowing near-term growth means that investors who take a closer look now will need to pick their spots carefully.
• Boris Collardi, the C.E.O. of Julius Baer, unexpectedly defected to a rival Swiss bank, Pictet. (FT)
• Robert Lu, the ChemChina executive who spearheaded the company’s $44 billion takeover of Syngenta, has joined China Reform Holdings. (FT)
• Harvey Schwartz, Goldman’s C.F.O. and a potential successor to Lloyd Blankfein, has a reported tendency to “mark to market” his underlings — meaning that, in accounting terms, he assesses their value to his objectives and treats them accordingly. (NYT)
• The Chinese conglomerate HNA Group gave incorrect information about two of its stakeholders in its offer prospectus for its $1.5 billion deal to acquire the Swiss air-travel logistics company, Gategroup Holding, the Swiss Takeover Board found. (WSJ)
• Uncertainty over the Affordable Care Act and the threat of companies like Amazon are prompting health organizations to expand, creating ties with former adversaries. (NYT)
Advertisement
• Alex M. Azar II, President Trump’s nominee to lead the Department of Health and Human Services, is expected to face tough questioning at a Senate confirmation hearing, about why Eli Lilly and Company raised its prices while he was there. (NYT)
• At Etsy, a new chief executive and a new focus on profitability have sapped the enthusiasm of many employees. (NYT)
• Chinese tech shares seem to be setting up for a classic burst-bubble, John Authers writes. (FT)
• One of the ironies of the global financial crisis: A decade later, a panic with origins in the United States has made the dollar more globally important than ever. (WSJ)
• Growth in the amount of money being lent by banks is slowing, even as signs point to a more buoyant economy. (WSJ)
• ICYMI: A new school in East Palo Alto for children from low-income families, funded by the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, has been met with wariness, and some families have blamed the school for their recent evictions. (NYT)
• Tencent rose to become a $500 billion company fueled by a culture of internal competition. Now those teams are working together to synchronize data and deliver targeted ads, with the aim of becoming a commercial powerhouse like Facebook. (Bloomberg)
• Who gets to make money in space? The Outer Space Treaty may now be getting in the way of entrepreneurs. (NYT)
Each weekday, DealBook reporters in New York and London offer commentary and analysis on the day’s most important business news. Want this in your own email inbox? Here’s the sign-up.
You can find live updates of DealBook coverage throughout the day at nytimes.com/dealbook.
Follow Andrew Ross Sorkin @andrewrsorkin, Michael J. de la Merced @m_delamerced and Amie Tsang @amietsang on Twitter.
Advertisement
We’d love your feedback as we experiment with the writing, format and design of this briefing. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.
We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Go to Home Page »