Advertisement
By ERIC LIPTON, BEN PROTESS and ANDREW W. LEHRENSEPT. 9, 2017

MOORESVILLE, N.C. — Business is booming here at the Trump National Golf Club.
The real estate office is selling million-dollar homes, the membership roster is nearly maxed out, and the private club is booking a record number of events, including a sold-out “Bag-Lady Luncheon,” where luxury leather handbags were auctioned for a charity that supports military veterans.
“How do we get busier?” asked Jennifer Minton, the club’s controller, during a recent tour of the grounds. “We only have so many weekends.”
It is a very different story in Los Angeles.
The Trump National Golf Club there, a public course, has seen a double-digit drop in revenue from golf in the first six months of 2017 compared with a year earlier, according to documents obtained through a public records request. A large crowd assembled this spring, but they were protesters spelling out “RESIST!” with their bodies.
The divergent fortunes of the North Carolina and Los Angeles clubs reflect a broader pattern across President Trump’s business empire: The red-blue political divide is not only informing the president’s policies, it is influencing his family-owned company’s bottom line.
Advertisement
Mr. Trump’s most recent financial disclosure statement, a 98-page report in June, showed that the Trump Organization brought in at least $597 million in revenue during his 2016 campaign and the first few months of his presidency, down about 3 percent compared with his previous filing in May 2016.
Advertisement
But an analysis by The New York Times of financial records, and interviews with club members and employees, show that most of his golf venues fared better in areas that supported President Trump in last year’s election than in those that did not.
The club here north of Charlotte is deep in Trump territory — the adjacent neighborhood, named the Point, is perhaps best known as home to more than a dozen Nascar drivers and crew chiefs, and precinct records show nearly 70 percent of area voters favored Mr. Trump over Hillary Clinton.
“We think of them as family here, not just owners of the club,” said Chuck McAllister, an executive at a global shoe-box manufacturing company, who held a fund-raiser for Mr. Trump last summer at the golf club. The event, he said, attracted nearly 300 supporters, including North Carolina’s then governor, and raised more than $1.4 million.
Revenues were also rising at the Trump golf clubs in Jupiter and West Palm Beach, Fla., two of the three golf clubs that the family owns in the state. Mr. Trump carried Florida in the election.
Until the violence in Charlottesville, Va., which generated a wave of cancellations at the Mar-a-Lago club in Palm Beach, Fla., business at that Trump property was also climbing, according to the president’s financial disclosure report.
That report paints a darker picture in states that Mr. Trump lost.
The Trump SoHo condominium-hotel in New York and the Trump International Hotel & Tower Chicago — both cities that are liberal strongholds — are seeing signs of hardship, according to two employees briefed on the company’s financials who were not authorized to speak publicly about them.
The red-blue contrast is even more apparent with the golf courses. Revenues over the past year have declined at the Ferry Point golf club in the Bronx, N.Y., at the Bedminster club in New Jersey, and at the club in Westchester County, N.Y., just a few miles from Mrs. Clinton’s home. Mr. Trump lost both states by large margins.
Advertisement
At the club in the Bronx, which is open to the public, golfers played about 2,200 fewer rounds in the most recent fiscal year, an 8 percent drop compared with a year earlier, according to data The Times obtained through a public records request from the City of New York.
The Trump Organization does not dispute that some properties are showing sensitivity to political factors. In June, the company introduced a line of budget-conscious hotels — the first are planned for Mississippi, which Mr. Trump won by an overwhelming margin — with a name, American Idea, that echoed the president’s campaign themes.
But in an interview, Eric Trump, who runs the family business along with his brother Donald Jr. and a small group of veteran executives, said that there were other variables that contributed to changes in revenue, including the activities of competitors. The company owns, operates or manages 16 golf courses — a dozen of them in the United States — and a collection of office properties and smaller business ventures. There are also eight stand-alone hotels, including six in the United States, all in major cities that voted for Mrs. Clinton.
“The company is doing extraordinary well, and I am extremely proud of our respective teams,” Eric Trump said, referring to staff members who run the business operations.
There are exceptions to the red-blue trend. Revenue was down in the last year at Trump National Doral Miami after the PGA Tour decided to move to Mexico a tournament it had sponsored at the club for decades.
And the Trump International Hotel in Washington, where residents voted overwhelmingly for Mrs. Clinton, has been doing better than the company had expected, according to financial records that the government mistakenly released this summer.
In the first four months of this year, the hotel generated more than $18 million in revenue and turned a nearly $2 million profit, far eclipsing the $2 million loss the company had been prepared to shoulder. Just five blocks from the White House, the hotel has become a gathering spot for Republican officials and lobbyists.
In New York, another Democratic city, the scene has been quite different. On three recent visits to the hotel in the upscale SoHo neighborhood of Manhattan — a glass tower that the Trumps operate — a reporter found the building’s poolside bar lightly trafficked and its mezzanine restaurant vacant, save for one table of two men.
Advertisement
The ground-floor lounge, a dimly lit room decorated with vintage Life Magazine and Playboy covers in a self-aware nod to “the gentlemen of the 1960s,” is closed Sundays through Tuesday, and an Asian restaurant there recently shuttered altogether.
Across the Hudson River in New Jersey, which also voted for Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Trump’s Bedminster club saw a 4 percent dip in revenue, according to the president’s financial disclosure.
One member who left the club last year, and who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he still lived in the area, said he departed because of controversial statements Mr. Trump made during his presidential campaign.
A hospital, a community nonprofit group and a private school that each previously held events at the club moved their gatherings elsewhere this year, according to a person briefed on Bedminster’s operations but not authorized to discuss them, who said that several longstanding members have either taken leaves of absence or left the club this year.
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
View all New York Times newsletters.
These changes have occurred even as the club was buzzing with activity. Mr. Trump, during the presidential transition and in the summer, has frequented the Bedminster club, which also hosted the United States Women’s Open in July.
In Los Angeles, the Trump club is attracting fewer rounds of golf — and less interest from Hollywood producers, who previously shot a range of commercials and movies there, including “Horrible Bosses 2.” In 2015, the Trump course issued 14 permits for film shoots; it fell to five permits in 2016 and four so far this year, according to data obtained from the public records request.
The Westchester club in New York has experienced a 6 percent decline in revenues and has lost several members over concerns about politics, according to two former members, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to avoid alienating the Trumps.
That club has also attracted protesters. In June, hundreds of people marched to protest the Trump Organization’s efforts to lower its local tax bill, with some of the demonstrators reportedly chanting “pay your share.”
“I think people see it as trying to get away with something at the expense of others, and I think that breeds resentment,” said Dana Levenberg, a Democrat who serves as town supervisor in Ossining, N.Y., which includes Briarcliff Manor where the club is.
Advertisement
“I certainly cannot speak for everyone in the town, but I do believe people are frustrated about Trump National.”
Here in North Carolina, the Trumps have been embraced by most area residents. Eric Trump and Donald Trump Jr. have lockers at the golf club. And the club has a Trump Piranhas swim team and a Trumpeteers summer camp, both of which were filled with children this summer.
“Those ‘Make America Great Again’ hats — there were a lot of them around here,” said Mike Carman who was playing on the course with several friends one recent afternoon.
The club charges a $25,000 initiation fee for golf memberships, monthly dues and fees of $725 and requires members to spend at least $150 quarterly at the club bar or restaurants.
“I’m fed up with government, I’m fed up with taxes, and I’m fed up with regulation,” said a lumber wholesaler, who lives not far from what is known as Trump Square and who agreed to be quoted by name, but then asked not to be named — as did others, reflecting the fear of partisan rancor even in a Trump stronghold.
It is a New England-styled town center that features a Trump International Realty office, the Trump Bakery (where Trump wine and a long list of other Trump-branded products are sold), and a clubhouse and restaurant, among other businesses operated by the Trump Organization.
Even those not interested in discussing President Trump’s politics said they were appreciative of the millions of dollars in upgrades the Trump Organization has made at the club since buying it in 2012.
“He did everything he said he was going to do,” said Tim Peticca, a software sales executive who is a golf club member.
Eric Lipton reported from Mooresville, N.C., and Ben Protess and Andrew W. Lehren from New York.
Eric Lipton reported from Mooresville, N.C., and Ben Protess and Andrew W. Lehren from New York. Steve Eder contributed reporting.
A version of this article appears in print on September 10, 2017, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: Blue-Red Split: From Capitol To 18th Green.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
See More »
Go to Home Page »