Advertisement
By ANNA DUBENKOJAN. 31, 2018

The political news cycle is fast, and keeping up can be overwhelming. Trying to find differing perspectives worth your time is even harder. That’s why we have scoured the internet for political writing from the right and left that you might not have seen.
Has this series exposed you to new ideas? Tell us how. Email us at ourpicks@nytimes.com.
For an archive of all the Partisan Writing Roundups, check out Our Picks.
Matt Lewis in The Daily Beast:
“The Trump framework for an immigration deal won’t make everyone happy, but it should at least keep Republicans happy.”
President Trump outlined an immigration framework in his State of the Union address that has Mr. Lewis cautiously optimistic. Perhaps, he writes, “the only guy who has the credibility with the base to actually grant amnesty is the same guy who called Mexicans rapists.” Read more »
_____
Dan McLaughlin in National Review: 
“Many Republicans, like me, who are not comfortable with Trump would have been a lot easier to convert if the Trump of tonight’s speech was the everyday Trump.”
Mr. McLaughlin found Mr. Trump’s use of his guest’s inspirational stories during the speech to be a sign of “weakness,” though the stories themselves were powerful reminders of “what a perilous world we still live in.” Overall, however, Mr. McLaughlin, a Trump skeptic on the right, was pleased to see the Republican president promote the benefits of tax cuts, solidarity with Iranian protesters and the need for compromise over immigration. Read more »
Advertisement
_____
The editors at The Washington Examiner: 
“‘The state of the union is strong’ is a perfectly fine cliché for presidents, but the idea of strength has extra meaning today.”
The editors at The Washington Examiner heard the president deliver an argument for a strong America. Strength, in their understanding, is less about power and more about resilience. They found the theme “cheering” and “uplifting” and, importantly, “a break from his invocation of strength in authoritarian ways.” Read more »
Advertisement
_____
Ramesh Ponnuru in Bloomberg:
“It was unlike the addresses of most presidents in its nearly total refusal to lay out any ideas for the future.”
Presidents tend to use State of the Union addresses to accomplish a few goals, Mr. Ponnuru writes. Apart from garnering good reviews and shoring up popularity, historically, presidents have used the opportunity to lay out policy priorities and “lay the groundwork for future legislative proposals.” In this, Mr. Ponnuru explains, Mr. Trump failed, with one very notable exception. On immigration, the president “outlined an extremely ambitious agenda with enough detail to make for a useful debate.” Read more »
What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday.
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
View all New York Times newsletters.
_____
A State of the Union address can be a type of partisan Pilates for some in the crowd. For others, it can be a direct ticket to becoming an internet meme. We break down the politics behind the reactions.
Joan Walsh in The Nation:
“Hours before the speech, his administration and Pundit Nation promised us the theme would be ‘unity.’ Instead, we got nativism and jingoism, gibberish, heavy breathing and appeals to divisions of every imaginable sort.”
Ms. Walsh wants to be fair and give credit where credit’s due: “He praised ‘beautiful clean coal,’ which was surreal, but he didn’t praise Nazis or white supremacists or say there are good people ‘on all sides’ of the racial divides he has widened.” However, she writes, that’s not enough to erase what she calls a “crisis of democracy that got more dangerous just in the last 36 hours.” Read more »
_____
Eric Levitz in New York Magazine:
“It was a speech that attempted to articulate a more racially and ideologically inclusive version of Trumpism, while also making the case that immigrants are bringing crime and drugs to the United States.”
Before Mr. Trump’s comments on immigration, Mr. Levitz admits, he “endorsed a series of vague, but nonetheless bipartisan — if not outright Democratic — policy proposals.” But the “great unifier’s mask really slipped,” according to Mr. Levitz, when the president made a case against “chain migration.” Read more »
_____
Jamelle Bouie in Slate: 
“The president’s guests to the State of the Union are always carefully chosen, and it’s hard to escape the sense that these families were picked because they offer plausible deniability to the president with regard to his most racially charged rhetoric.”
Mr. Bouie doesn’t see what other commentators saw in the president’s address. “Far from signaling some pivot toward respectability,” he writes, this State of the Union speech serves as a reminder that “the president sees attacking people of color as a top priority.” Read more »
_____
Richard Wolffe in The Guardian: 
“Above all, it was a night when he could pretend to be the president he never is.”
Mr. Wolffe isn’t so sure about the sincerity of the president’s love for America. After all, he points out, the speech comes just “one day after he decided to go easy on Russia for manipulating American democracy.” Read more »
_____
Chris Cillizza in CNN:
“The signal was clear: Trump is not just using ‘America First’ as a piece of rhetoric; he’s heavily focused on making it a policy reality as well.”
Mr. Cillizza breaks down the president’s speech into six takeaways. One is that Mr. Trump has been governing as the “Obama eraser.” Mr. Cillizza takes Mr. Trump’s pledge to keep the prison at Guantánamo Bay open as “a direct rebuttal to Obama’s long-made and long-failed pledge to close the prison.” Mr. Cillizza gives the president high marks for stagecraft, calling the stories of the families he brought to the State of the Union “haunting and memorable.” Read more »
_____
The editorial board at USA Today: 
“It is best to view the ‘presidential’ Trump more as a one-night wonder than as a champion of compromise.”
The editors at USA Today warn their readers not to take Mr. Trump’s overtures toward bipartisanship too seriously. They point out that he “has a habit of making bipartisan appeals only to undermine them within days or even hours.” Moreover, they write, “his calls for bipartisan compromise on such areas as infrastructure and immigration are actually major departures in current policy that lack popular support.” Read more »
_____
Want the Partisan Writing Roundup in your inbox? Sign up for the Morning Briefing Newsletter or the What We’re Reading Newsletter.
Advertisement
Have thoughts about this collection? Email feedback to ourpicks@nytimes.com.
Follow Anna Dubenko on Twitter: @AnnaDubenko.
We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
See More »
Go to Home Page »