Advertisement
Supported by
Frugal Traveler
The quiet neighborhood of Coyoacán captures the capital’s understated cultural soul and, in many ways, is a getaway within Mexico City itself. 
By  Lucas Peterson
Call it a case of FOMO — Fear of Missing Out. I’m usually resistant to pangs of envy inspired by social media photos of friends and families on perfect getaways around the world. And seeing that multiple acquaintances had all visited the same destination would, if anything, make me decidedly less likely to visit a place. But this was different. Everyone I knew, it seemed, was going to Mexico City, and having the times of their lives. And I wanted to go, too. 
But I was determined not to retread — not entirely, at least — the same attractive parks and tree-lined avenues dotted with Instagrammable restaurants and coffee shops as my peers. I would stay away from popular neighborhoods like La Condesa and Roma Norte during this trip, preferring instead to hone my focus about six miles south, on the quieter neighborhood of Coyoacán. Best known as the location of Frida Kahlo’s Blue House, this “place of coyotes” proved to be equal parts serene and invigorating — the understated cultural soul of a city and, in many ways, a getaway within Mexico City itself. And my budget, modest as it was, didn’t limit my enjoyment during a four-day, three-night trip.
José Antonio Albanés, my spry middle-aged tour guide whom I’d found through an Airbnb Experience ($50, which included a mountain of food), was born and raised in Coyoacán (which refers to both the neighborhood and the larger borough of the same name, one of 16 that make up the city) and had a laundry list of reasons it was the best area in the city. “Everything,” he said, “is better. The water, the climate, the culture.” The climate? He was adamant. “It is better,” he said. “It’s cooler.” 
He also maintained that it was safer. “You see this?” he asked, motioning toward traffic crawling northward on a one-way cobblestone street near Hidalgo Garden park. “It’s easy to come into Coyoacán, but it’s difficult to leave.” He said there were traffic bottlenecks on the few roads exiting the neighborhood. “Criminals don’t like to come here.”
I couldn’t verify that intel, but there was a lot about Coyoacán that seemed different from the rest of the city. While bustling, it also felt inviting, almost suburban, and largely unruffled from the masses of tourists that crowd neighborhoods like the Centro Histórico. Much of that might be attributable to the lack of big hotel chains in the area — you won’t find Sheratons or Hiltons in Coyoacán. 
That left me with a handful of options, primarily small inns and Airbnbs. My first night in the neighborhood, I stayed just a couple blocks away from the Blue House at the cozy Chalet del Carmen Coyoacán, where I found a room for 1,330 Mexican pesos, a little over $70. I spent the next couple of nights in a private room with attached bathroom in a great central location near Plaza de la Conchita, booked through Airbnb for $30 per night. 
My host, Gustavo Hernández Clark, waxed rhapsodic about his adopted home, saying he loved “everything about Coyoacán.” He emigrated from Cuba 20 years ago, murkily referring only to “the situation there” when discussing his homeland. After checking me in, we walked around the corner to one of his lunch haunts, Taquería los Parados de Coyoacán. I had a lovely plate of enchiladas suizas stuffed with chicken and drowning in a tangy green chili salsa for 91 pesos, less than $5, plus a freshly squeezed orange juice for another 35 pesos.
It was the first of many excellent meals. Unsurprisingly, the volume of inexpensive street food and casual cafes in Coyoacán didn’t disappoint. My first afternoon in the city was brightened considerably when I stopped by La Casa del Pan Papalotl, where I got a creamy banana licuado (something between a milkshake and a smoothie) for 32 pesos. The cute vegetarian restaurant sits on a lively plaza on Calle Xicoténcatl, and I spent some time hanging out, perusing jewelry and bootleg DVDs peddled by sidewalk vendors. I also couldn’t resist an enormous basket spilling over with churros. I picked up a bag of four of the fried sugary treats for 15 pesos.
Sweet, doughy delights are in abundance, and you’d be remiss to visit Mexico without trying a concha, a kind of pan dulce (sweet bread) caked with a cracked, crumbly topping. Rafaella Panadería does a nice, chocolate version (18 pesos) that’s worth the walk to the northwest corner of the neighborhood. A few blocks down on Avenida Division del Norte is El Rey del Taco, which does a decent taco al pastor (12 pesos), but is really worth visiting for the selection of tasty pickled chilies and onions that come with it.
Not all the food is quite as casual. Jake Lindeman, a friend and expat photographer based in Mexico City, recommended I check out La Barraca Valenciana. I enjoyed a Gallega torta (135 pesos), a crusty white roll stuffed with tender bacalao a lo tío, or salted cod, alongside an Espanta Pájaros pale ale (65 pesos). Another good seafood option is just down the block at Tu Ceviche, where the quality product made up for what began as an uneven experience. I walked in well before their advertised closing time one evening only to be told they were shuttering early. Fortunately, they allowed me to get take out — a generous portion of ceviche negra (170 pesos), zesty cubes of wahoo fish served with a bag of fresh tortilla chips.
And, of course, there are the markets. The Mercado de Comida de Coyoacán, which specializes in food, and the larger Mercado de Coyoacán, which takes up the better part of a city block and sells nearly anything you could imagine, are worth a few hours of your time. Besides the fresh produce, spices, slabs of queso fresco and containers of organic honey (80 pesos for a small jar) at the larger market, there’s also clothing, toys and numerous casual sit-down restaurants where you can enjoy a fresh enchilada or tostada. 
It also happens to be a stone’s throw from the Frida Kahlo Museum, also known as the Casa Azúl or Blue House, obligatory during a visit to Coyoacán. Here are a few tips: Buy your timed tickets online (200 pesos during the week, 220 on the weekend) and show up early; the lines, even for ticketed customers, are formidable. Also, it’s worth the 30 extra pesos to buy a photo permit so you can snap pictures in the museum — employees are very aggressive about enforcing the permit rule.
Once inside, you’ll get a fascinating glimpse into the life of Mexico’s two most internationally famous artists (the other being her partner, Diego Rivera). The museum begins with family portraits — “Mi Familia” and “Retrato de Mi Padre Guillermo Kahlo” — and accelerates from there, displaying pencil drawings, private photographs, and a collection of ex-votos, small panels depicting 19th- and 20th-century Mexican life. A separate exhibition (included with admission) focuses on Kahlo’s wardrobe, bringing into focus an aspect of her life I hadn’t given much thought: childhood polio and a near-fatal bus accident that had lifelong effects on her health and work. Different crutches, braces and girdles — even a prosthetic leg — are on display.
A couple of blocks away is the Taller  Experimental de Cerámica,  or Experimental Ceramics Workshop, a must-visit for anyone interested in the craft. It’s a little tricky to find — you enter on Centenario, not Aguayo, as you might think from looking at a map. And don’t expect anyone to let you in or greet you. I let myself in, reaching through and opening up the big metal gate despite the (ultimately harmless) yapping and snarling of several dark blue-tinged xoloitzcuintli, Mexican hairless dogs. 
Once inside, I wandered around the sprawling half-indoors, half-outdoors facility, largely unsupervised. Eventually I made it into the main showroom, where I surveyed the gorgeous collection of plates, cups, saucers and other decorative pieces before finally settling on something: A small juicer for 216 pesos. The workshop also has a few shelves of broken and flawed pieces, which sell by weight.
Coyoacán has an artistic heart, as demonstrated by the multitude of cultural activities I was able to find in just a short period. Just south of the Viveros de Coyoacán, a big public park, I attended an energetically presented black box theater performance of “Todo” by Janne Teller at the Teatro Santa Catarina (150 pesos, half off for students and teachers). Across the street is the Casa de Cultura Jesús Reyes Heroles, a beautiful cultural center with salsa classes and free performances that is open to the public.
I also enjoyed the Centro Cultural Elena Garro, another cultural center that is notable for its large and gorgeous bookstore. I splurged a little and purchased Acridofagia y Otro Insectos, a fascinating book about the consumption of insects, for about 475 pesos. And I was particularly smitten with the Cineteca Nacional, a large, multifaceted cinema and arts complex that’s technically just north of the Coyoacán border. There are bookstores, cafes, a movie memorabilia shop called Belahugozzi (guess the reference) and, naturally, movie theaters. For just 30 pesos, I attended an evening showing of the Best Picture-winning “The Shape of Water.”
José Antonio was explaining the history of the city to me as we wandered through Coyoacán’s tree-shaded public parks, filled with vendors, young couples and tarot readers. We walked and talked over the better part of the day, munching on tostadas at the Mercado de Coyoacán and crunching on chapulines (grasshoppers) while sipping mezcal at the restaurant Mezcalero. We covered a good deal of the neighborhood on foot and even had a casual run-in with Rina Lazo, a 94-year-old artist who was an associate of Diego Rivera and Frida Kahlo. Finally, we turned down Avenida Francisco Sosa and began heading west, away from the Jardín Centenario park. “Now,” he said, “You will see what I’m talking about with the climate.”
Suddenly, the heavy traffic all but vanished. The hubbub from the buskers and kids listening to Top 40 music on boomboxes disappeared. All that remained were thick-trunked trees and leaves trembling slightly in the breeze. We continued walking as the breeze picked up, and the branches swayed and leaves rustled. I could feel it and I had to admit he was right: It was definitely cooler in Coyoacán.
Lucas Peterson is the Frugal Traveler columnist. He has written for GQ, Lucky Peach, Eater, LA Weekly and Food Republic. His video series for Eater, "Dining on a Dime," is now in its 11th season.@FrugalTraveler
Advertisement
Collapse
SEE MY OPTIONS