Advertisement


      By ELAINE GLUSAC

JAN. 25, 2018


A new generation of chefs is championing locally sourced menus, and a relaxation of liquor production laws has led to a boom in microbreweries.
Related Article

The construction cranes that pierce the downtown Calgary skyline and nearby neighborhoods suggest a boom on the Alberta prairie. In fact, in the past two years, sagging oil and gas prices have crimped Calgary’s economy, which is now showing signs of recovery. Projects underway before the slowdown, including the music museum at Studio Bell, have charged the city’s cultural scene. A new generation of chefs is championing Alberta-grown-and-raised foodstuffs, and a relaxation of liquor production laws in 2013 has led to a boom in microbreweries. Banff-bound visitors commonly land in Calgary and head directly to the national park, about a 90-minute drive west. But Calgary also champions the outdoors, with extensive recreational paths, world-class Olympic facilities that are open to the public and a penchant for open-air cafes even in winter when, occasionally, the chinook winds sweep in.

Explore the map and find things to do in Calgary.

Arrive at Studio Bell (18 Canadian dollars admission, or about $14.40), home to the National Music Center, in time to catch the 3 p.m. demonstration of its silent-movie-era organ. The music museum approaches its subject from multiple angles spanning the purely visual — recently, K.D. Lang’s vintage-inspired costume collection — and the science of sound. Interactive exhibits teach visitors to play the drums, guitar or piano and conduct a touchless theremin instrument. The fifth-floor bridge that connects the two wings of the museum, designed by the architect Brad Cloepfil, features a “Solar Drone” installation that gathers solar energy from roof panels to play its ceiling-suspended series of piano sound boards. When you leave, peek through ground-floor windows to spy the R.V.-based mobile studio once owned by the Rolling Stones.
Calgary’s Beltline, a gentrifying neighborhood just blocks south of downtown, is destined to expand yours. Some of the city’s most creative chefs and bars have addresses here. Start with a fancy cocktail — try the rosy mezcal-sloe-gin Other Other Woman (13 dollars) — in a swanky setting at Proof. Then walk a block to Ten Foot Henry, a hardy vegetable-focused restaurant with a bustling dining room and a cheeky cartoon namesake. The open kitchen turns out robust dishes that recently included roasted gai lan broccoli in tahini (13 dollars); a Spanish style tortilla made with yams (10 dollars); and scallops with smoked prosciutto (29 dollars). For small plates and natural wines, hit the retro charmer Pigeonhole from the chef Justin Leboe where past menus have included heirloom tomatoes with local peaches (15 dollars) and lamb bacon atop toast (12 dollars).
The stretch of 9th Avenue Southeast running from Studio Bell through the neighboring Inglewood district has been dubbed the Music Mile for its clubs. At least two of them stage live music nightly, including the blues-centric Blues Can. Nearby, Ironwood Stage & Grill programs everything from bluegrass and jazz to Bruce Springsteen tributes, socially conscious folk music and nationally touring acts. Paintings and photographs of music stars line the walls bracketing the raised stage, and elevated banquettes offer uninterrupted sightlines.
With some 500 miles of multiuse pathways, Calgary claims to have the most extensive urban recreational network in North America, and Calgarians cycle in all seasons, including winter. Make like a local and arrange to have a fat-tire bike, designed to ride in the snow, delivered from Nomad Mobile Gear Rentals (60 dollars for one day). For a scenic ride from downtown, cycle the paths that follow the city-bisecting Bow River. A series of pedestrian and cycling bridges crosses it, including the tunnellike Peace Bridge, designed by the Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava.
Work up an appetite for lunch at Deane House. The retrofitted 1906 home, originally part of the frontier outpost Fort Calgary, is now under the management of the team behind the acclaimed River Café in Prince’s Island Park. The menu champions contemporary Canadian cuisine, drawing on local ingredients in seasonal dishes that recently included hangar steak tartare with puffed barley (17 dollars), cured Alberta trout with beets (14 dollars) and duck confit pirogi (21 dollars). Tables fill sunny wraparound porches, and interior rooms channel the wild yonder in landscape paintings, mounted animal heads and a chandelier made of branches.
Public art animates Calgary’s downtown, and Jaume Plensa’s gigantic wire-mesh head “Wonderland” is a popular selfie stop. For a more thoughtful exploration of contemporary art, make your way to the Esker Foundation (free) on the fourth floor of an Inglewood office building. The privately funded, noncommercial gallery, named for the ridge left behind by a retreating glacier, aims to stimulate discussion on contemporary affairs via three shows staged each year. Winter shows survey the color effects explored by the artist Kapwani Kiwanga (Feb. 3 to May 6) and the fantastical beasts created by the duo known as DaveandJenn (Jan. 29 to April 29).
Across the Elbow River from downtown, Inglewood makes a funky first impression, and its collection of independent boutiques maintains that vibe. Troll for locally made ceramics and wood-turned bowls at Galleria Inglewood. Among several resale shops, Antiquaire Boutique assembles good-condition vintage apparel. Shop Purr Fine Clothing & Accessories for retro-inspired looks, the Uncommons for wearable sleeping bags and the Silk Road Spice Merchant for herb blends. Lodged in a former stable, the Livery Shop stocks clothing and accessory brands with rustic character, including Brixton flannel shirts, Fjallraven backpacks and the shop’s own Camp Brand Goods T-shirts.
Since December 2013, when the province dropped its minimum production levels, microbreweries have exploded in the city. Eighteen are now plotted on a new map available free at many breweries. While in Inglewood, take a break with a refreshing Dandelion’s Blonde or a fruity This Must Be the I.P.A. (5 dollar pints) at Cold Garden Beverage Company. The 2017 newcomer occupies a garage-like industrial space with thrift-shop couches and wooden tables in view of the brewing tanks.
New construction is filling the redeveloping East Village near the river. But one prominent historic address, the former Simmons mattress factory, has been saved and now hosts three acclaimed restaurants. Try them all by dining at one, Charbar. Here the chef Jessica Pelland butchers animals, ages steaks and cooks them on an Argentine-style wood-fired grill. This is a steakhouse that meat-averse diners can embrace, with loads of vegetable options, including a charred and raw vegetable salad (14 dollars), best ordered with a side of Sidewalk Citizen sourdough (6 dollars) from the neighboring bakery. Grilled “asado style” steaks (market price) come with beef fat fries. Start with a spicy rum-citrus Boxspring cocktail (13 dollars) and end with an espresso (5 dollars) from Phil & Sebastian Coffee Roasters, another Simmons tenant.
Calgary may be most associated with cowboys, thanks to its 10-day summer rodeo, the Calgary Stampede, but its actors, dancers and musicians contribute to a thriving performing arts scene over the rest of the year. Though influential groups, including Lunchbox Theatre and the Alberta Ballet, perform elsewhere, the Arts Commons complex of theaters downtown makes handy one-stop cultural shopping. Resident companies include the polished Alberta Theater Projects, staging new works and, often, those by Canadian playwrights, and the innovative One Yellow Rabbit Performance Theater.
You may spot local chefs and restaurateurs browsing the Calgary Farmers Market, especially if you’re in the company of Karen Anderson, owner of Alberta Food Tours. The Calgary-based cookbook author offers a series of culinary tours in the province, including the Sunday Brunch and a Calgary Farmers’ Market Tour (55 dollars). The event starts with Yum Bakery savory pastries, salads and Fratello Analog coffee procured at the market and served at the neighboring J. Webb Wine Merchants shop. Next, a prandial promenade around the food stalls samples Better fruit popsicles, Sylvan Star Gouda cheese and Lund’s Organic Farm seasonal produce, among many satiating stops.
Calgary held the Winter Olympics in 1988 and has continued to use the competition’s venues, which are now a training draw for medal hopefuls. Several Olympic facilities are open to the public, including the bobsled run at WinSport park. More accessible is Olympic Plaza in the heart of downtown; it was built for the games as the site of the medal ceremonies. In winter, the reflecting pond becomes a free skating rink, attracting Katarina Witt and Brian Boitano imitators (skate rentals cost 12 dollars for up to two hours).
Hotel rates can be quite high in Calgary during the week when business travelers dominate the guest registries. But on weekends, rates tend to drop, making some of its nicest hotels affordable. Leading that list is the 143-room Le Germain Hotel Calgary, a stylish spot downtown across the street from the Calgary Tower. Spacious rooms with espresso machines and plush linens feel residential, and the popular restaurant Charcut is in the lobby. Rooms from 189 dollars; legermainhotels.com.
Opened in 1914, the historic Fairmont Palliser offers grand public spaces, including its elegant lobby and woody bar, and a full range of amenities, among them a spa and swimming pool. Rooms from 190 dollars; fairmont.com.
Flight and Hotel information provided by Google.Prices represent a snapshot of low fares and rates for weekend trips.
Advertisement