Advertisement
Supported by
The Caribbean Now
The hurricane battered the island, and most hotels and restaurants have not reopened. The crowds have yet to return, which means visitors will have stretches of sand to themselves.
By  Michelle Higgins
Hurricanes Irma and Maria devastated islands in the Caribbean last September. Six months later, how are they recovering? To find out, writers for Travel spent time in Vieques, St. Martin (below), St. John, Dominica and San Juan, P.R. 
A smattering of  sun seekers  had arrived at the beach and were greeted by two craftsmen selling necklaces and sarongs. A local chef, her kitchen located inside a rusty shipping container, grilled fish along an otherwise deserted stretch of Orient Bay beach in  St.  Martin. 
Gazing out at the calm azure water, a first-time visitor might find it hard to imagine that this long crescent of powdery white sand was once lined with tiki bars, palm trees and thousands of tourists in beach chairs with matching umbrellas.
About six months after Hurricane Irma pummeled this quintessential Caribbean island with terrifying force, sweeping away homes, tossing cars and boats, and wreaking havoc on its tourism infrastructure, there is still much to rebuild.
“Right now, I see the sea, I see the sun and I see beautiful nature,” said Lorenz G. Winter, 55, a real estate agent on vacation from Munich, Germany, who was sipping cold beers on Orient Bay with his wife and two daughters in their 20s. 
“Yes, nature is still here,” his daughter Sarah Winter chimed in, her back turned to the skeletal remains of damaged resorts.
While signs of recovery are starting to emerge across this dual-nation island, split between a French and Dutch side, St. Martin has a long way to go to restore its tourism industry. Visitors seeking sun, sand and solitude will find all 37 of the island’s stunning beaches open, the roads clear of wreckage and locals welcoming as ever. But blue tarps cover many deserted homes, their roofs damaged or missing entirely. Most hotels and restaurants are closed or under construction — if they are there at all. The destruction across the island is impossible to ignore.
Passengers arriving at  Princess  Juliana International Airport, on the Dutch side of the island earlier this month, were directed onto the tarmac, past the battered terminal to a white wedding-style tent for immigration. Outside the parking lot, the Pink Iguana, a tugboat turned dockside bar, remained capsized in the water. Down the road, Maho Village was practically a ghost town. Of the roughly 40 bars, shops, restaurants and clubs along its entertainment strip, only a pharmacy, grocery store, real estate office and a few restaurants had reopened. All four of its seaside resorts — Sonesta Maho Beach Resort, Casino & Spa, Sonesta Ocean Point Resort, the Royal Islander Club La Plage and Royal Islander Club La Terrasse — are undergoing major reconstruction. None are scheduled to open before summer or fall. 
In Marigot, the French capital, souvenir vendors set up stalls across from blown-out buildings, seemingly untouched since the hurricane. A few miles north in Grand Case, the island’s restaurant row remained largely shuttered. Out of more than 60 establishments, fewer than a dozen had reopened. Among them: the Rainbow Café, a waterfront restaurant and bar with beach service; two open-air seaside grills, known as lolos; the upscale Bistrot Caraibes and Spiga, an Italian restaurant that the hurricane left largely untouched, despite ripping the roofs off its neighbors. 
By contrast,  Philipsburg,  the Dutch capital, was largely back to business, with the gleaming jewelry stores and revamped clothing boutiques of Front Street beckoning day-trippers arriving from cruise ships. Even as workers hammered within the top story of the Holland House Beach Hotel, a mix of American and European tourists lounged on its chic wooden deck and dined on $22 lobster sandwiches in its shaded waterfront restaurant. Down the boardwalk, Pirates in Paradise, a themed bar with a cultlike following from Ohio State, served up $2 beers on a veranda shaded by a blue tarp, despite the gutted second story above it. 
Around the corner, Juggie Amarnaney held court at his tiny namesake bar, Juggie’s Place, offering returning visitors a cold drink and a Cuban cigar beneath a canopy of some 250 bras — each one representing a $5 donation to breast cancer awareness. “There are people who love this island and there are people who love the people of this island,” he said. “Right now,” he said, nodding to a couple from Wallingford, Conn., who had returned to the island for the 26th time, “they’re the ones who are coming back.” The others, he said, will wait for more hotels, restaurants and flights to open up. “They want all the bells and whistles that come with their resorts. You won’t get that right now.” 
What visitors do have, at least for now, is the run of the place. Even with a Carnival cruise ship in port, Philipsburg was largely devoid of tourists. A lone Segway zoomed up and down the boardwalk. Parking was plentiful. The red-and-white latticed Guavaberry Emporium beckoned passers-by with reggae music and free tastings of spiced rums. And diners had their choice of beachfront tables. 
“It’s much more like the first year we came, back in 2001, a little bit quieter but just as much fun,” said Jeff Kish, 64, who owns an ambulance company in Toledo, Ohio, and was vacationing with his wife, two daughters, their husbands and four grandchildren, between the ages of 4 and 14. Irma destroyed the timeshare the family usually stays at, so the  Kishes  booked hotel rooms in Simpson Bay, where restaurants and bars along the entertainment strip were largely open. The family had no trouble accomplishing their vacation to-do list, which included offshore fishing, relaxing on the beach and snorkeling in Mullet Bay, said Mr. Kish. “We found it’s been just as pleasurable, just as beautiful, once you get past the destruction.” 
About 80 percent  of the island’s 5,667 guest rooms that were open before Hurricane Irma were still out of commission in March, including the 317-room Westin Dawn Beach Resort & Spa, the 258-room Riu Palace St. Martin and the 83-room Belmond La Samanna. Flights scheduled for the month of March to St. Martin are down by 1,507 with 92,252 fewer seats when compared with a year ago, according to data and analytics from FlightGlobal. 
Yet with another hurricane season fast approaching, much of the tourist zone is not only rebuilding, but undergoing a multimillion-dollar face-lift. The Maho Group alone is putting more than $50 million into a revamp of the Sonesta Resorts, including overhauling the Sonesta Maho Beach Resort, and incorporating a new contemporary design. Sonesta’s Casino Royale, the largest on the island, with more than 21,000 square feet of gaming, plans to reopen this summer with two new bistro-style al fresco restaurants and a rooftop bar and lounge. Shiny new  rental  cars awaits visitors at the Alamo rental office. The Rainbow Café in Grand Case has a new whitewashed deck, a reconfigured layout, and chic red-and-white furnishings. “Everything is destroyed, so I tried to do something better,” the owner, Gobert Douglas, said with a French accent. Pointing out that he could have spent less on the renovation, he said, “I prefer to do this, change the floor, all the seating, all the style of the restaurant to make it new.” 
Other business owners said they were hopeful that the renewed development would bring tourists back. “From here St. Martin only gets better,” said Sam Punjabi, the manager and diamond specialist at Shopper’s Haven, a jewelry store in Philipsburg. “There are places that are completely gone. You might see something different come up. You might see something better come up. Like they say, when you hit bottom, there’s only one way to go.”
Yet with so many places still under repair, some businesses are recommending first-time visitors wait until next season to come to St. Martin. “I’m wary of bringing first-time clients to the island for the moment,” said Lesley Reed, the  owner  and broker at St. Martin Sotheby’s International Realty, noting that just 25 percent of the island villas she manages would be ready by April 1. “I think it needs another six months.”
But even in early March, visitors appeared to be enjoying themselves. A sunburned crowd gathered at Maho Beach, adjacent to the Princess Juliana International Airport on the island’s southwestern shore, and famous for up-close views — and  the jet blasts  — of departing and landing aircraft. As incoming planes buzzed low overhead, swimsuit-clad tourists took their positions in an attempt to capture the ultimate selfie on a quintessential Caribbean beach, with a jumbo jet coming right at them. 
Next door, at the Sunset Beach Bar, an estimated 400 tourists dined on wood-fired pizzas and sipped cocktails from plastic cups. Perched on a stool overlooking the water, Elizabeth Schooley and her boyfriend, Scott Anthony, took in the view. “You can’t beat this — on the beach, the clear blue water, the sun,” said Ms. Schooley, an airline operation agent from Las Vegas who had arrived for the day on a Carnival Cruise. “This is amazing.”
Kim Serrant, a manager working in the air-conditioned gift shop next to the pool deck, said that normally the pool and restaurant would be standing room only. “A lot of people are not coming because they think the island isn’t safe or that there isn’t any place to stay. We have villas. There are still some hotels available,” she said, pointing out that the Atrium Beach Resort & Spa, next door was accepting guests. “It is still the same friendly island — St. Martin, sunshine city. I would invite people to come on back. We are waiting here with open arms.” 
Each day, progress is beginning to take hold. By the end of June, inventory on the Dutch side of the island is expected to grow by  560  rooms with properties like Divi Little Bay Beach Resort and Oyster Bay Beach Resort expected to reopen. On the French side, roughly 600 rooms will be added by year-end, according to the Kate Richardson, the director of St. Martin’s tourism office, including intimate boutique-style properties. Among them: the Hotel La Plantation on Orient Bay (April), the Mediterranean-style Le Petit Hotel (June) and the Grand Case Beach Club (October). 
New tourist attractions are also welcoming visitors. In November, Rainforest Adventures opened a new zip line — the Flying Dutchman — in Emilio Wilson Park. Visitors can tour a new museum dedicated to the history of the site, a former plantation dating back to the 1700s, and dine in a refurbished stone building that was once the sugar cane boiling house. And with the island’s natural attractions still intact, tour operators continue to offer sailing trips, snorkeling excursions and hikes up to Pic Paradise, the highest spot on the island.
“There are some things that the hurricane just couldn’t take away, said Marc  Petrelluzzi , whose family owns Le Petit Hotel and its beloved sister property, L’Esplanade. “It’s the view. It’s the sea. It’s the beaches. It’s the vegetation.  It’s  nature.” 
Michelle Higgins writes the Fix column, offering advice on home renovations and décor. She has covered travel, real estate and other lifestyle topics for more than a decade at The Times. She previously worked at The Wall Street Journal.@michellehiggins
Advertisement
Collapse
SEE MY OPTIONS