The country’s Chettinad region is full of architectural relics in various states of decaying opulence. For some inhabitants, the extravagance goes on; for others, it is a memory slipping away.
By NANCY HASSMAY 17, 2017

Driving on the main roads in the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu, the barely there villages that materialize every few miles take on a comforting rhythm: a handful of stucco cottages in mildew-stained pink, marigold and teal; a shrine to Ganesha on a tall white pole; a cluster of tiny thatched-roof stores, like packed closets flung open. On shaded porches in front, women in saris, shiny with perspiration, slice pineapple beside a glass-door cooler of Fanta.
Then, after hours, and with no warning, you pass an unmarked Rubicon, leading to an entirely different sort of outpost: the first in a cluster of 74 towns that make up the Chettinad region. Suddenly nothing you think you know about the humble, low-rise, rambling charm of rural India holds true.
Cement lean-tos and shacks give way to a formal grid of streets with mansion after looming mansion in various states of maintained opulence and elegant decay, their decorative facades partly hidden by high walls. Built between 1850 and 1950, these homes — some of which dwarf the grand cottages of Newport and the villas of Cap Ferrat — number over 15,000 throughout Chettinad, which covers about 600 square miles. Many have more than 60 rooms spread over interiors as large as one and a half acres. A trippy Walt Disney World of styles, there’s a Raj-inflected Victorian next to a Georgian Palladian with hints of Tudor, and down the street, an Art Deco confection straight out of South Beach.
The fever dream of a globe-trotting Hindu merchant and banking clan called the Nattukottai Chettiars that thrived during colonialist expansion, the massive homes — at least those not abandoned due to the crushing cost of upkeep, then pillaged for the remarkable architectural details within — are still owned by the families whose ancestors built them. Few of those owners actually live in them full time now, but, like the castles and manor houses that dot the English countryside, the residences are familial status symbols of staggering heft, worrisome expense and emotional attachment. Except for salvage, they have no resale value. Who might buy an 150-year-old, 85-room villa two hours from the nearest airport in an area that modern industry has forgotten? But that is not the point, as any Chettiar will tell you, slightly annoyed, over tea in a china cup that may have been brought back from the Far East generations ago. They tend to be acutely aware of being Vaishya, the merchant caste, not Brahmin — the highest-ranking of the four Hindu castes — though they will not admit as much; and thus their homes are social currency, a calling card throughout India and its diaspora.
Advertisement
These are party houses on a scale unimaginable in the West — or even on the rest of the subcontinent. An Indian wedding, any Indian wedding, is a world-class blowout lasting days, but even Mumbai jet-setters and Bollywood stars covet an invitation to a Chettinad marriage, so epic is its scale. At least a half-dozen times a year, the extended families and hangers-on travel back for such celebrations, as well as for births and funerals. Among the few viable businesses in the region are those that make the thousands of fresh flower garlands needed to drape pillars, or supply cooks to simmer gallons of curry with the spice mix particular to Chettinad: Indonesian nutmeg, Madagascar cloves, blue ginger from Laos or Vietnam. When the weekend is over, the owners leave behind the phalanx of servants who live in and maintain the houses (some have served the same family for generations) returning to the southern capital of Chennai, where most of them live, in villas or well-appointed apartments with another retinue of help. But the ancestral home — an albatross, a joy — is rarely far from their minds.
“Every moment I am thinking of what will happen to this place in the future,” says 82-year-old Meenakshi Meyyappan, who, with relatives, owns a massive 1916 Art Nouveau chateau with gleaming black-and-white checkerboard marble floors, massive crystal chandeliers and expanses of etched mirrors. It adjoins the 200-year-old palatial estate of her late husband’s family. As grande dame proprietor of the Bangala (“The Bungalow”), a chicly funky 18-year-old hotel housed in a converted men’s club (now one of the few places for tourists to stay in the area), she is also among the few Chettiars who has found a way to live in her family’s home most of the year, though she also keeps a large residence in Chennai. “My son tells me to take things day by day, but that is impossible for me. There is too much at stake.” She estimates that as many as half of the mansions are now abandoned; not every family has been able to hold on to enough wealth for upkeep, and as there are often many relatives involved in doing that, negotiations can be tense.
And some Chettiars don’t have the option of just letting go, of repairing back to the city with a shrug; the advancing decay is their permanent lot. “When you tell people outside here that you are a Chettiar they assume you are rich,” says 44-year-old Rama Kumarappan. His family lost their money long ago, and now he occupies a 63-room home with his wife, his aunt and his two children, barely getting by. Black mold creates swirling patterns, like threatening clouds, on the white masonry of the mansion’s front walls, and the once-vibrant turquoise-painted pillars are faded and chipped; his aunt dries rice snacks in the vast inner courtyard to package and sell. “I love this house,” he says, “but to keep it up is an impossible thought.”
Advertisement
Still, even faded, the homes are a testament to both the inward-looking traditionalism of the clan and its fearless embrace of the far-flung world. The early history of the group is unclear, but most of them believe their forebears came to Chettinad centuries ago, after a tsunami in the coastal spot they originally inhabited; despite this being one of the driest regions in India, their fear of flooding reportedly led them to build the mansions of Chettinad up several steps (always an odd number, in keeping with Vastu Shastra, the Indian feng shui). During the 1600s, most of the families were trading salt and gems, but two centuries later, they had developed an expertise in money lending and hooked up with the English empire, creating sprawling systems of debt and credit that took them to Burma, Singapore, Malaysia and Vietnam. They poured their newfound wealth into the towns of Chettinad.
It was in Southeast Asia that these mansion-builders found the teak used to adorn their houses. They traveled to Venice for candy-colored Murano chandeliers, some 10 feet across, and to Belgium for giant mahogany-framed mirrors. From Birmingham on the River Rea, they carried back delicate glazed ceramic tiles with roses never seen in scorching Tamil Nadu; in Switzerland they picked up towering grandfather clocks, some of which still tick, echoing through the cavernous halls. Enamored of Shakespeare, one builder adorned a Juliet balcony with plaster figures of the doomed couple. As the decades passed, their travels kept them abreast of international style; by the 1930s, new houses resembled grand Deco movie palaces.
Still, despite the array of exterior styles, the interiors conform strictly to a layout that reflects the culture’s class and gender differences. Through the front gate, you find a covered area where men conduct business with tradesmen on two raised platforms called thinnai that flank the front door. The door itself is often elaborately carved from a single huge slab of teak, with applied panels that tell stories of Vishnu and Shiva, the Chettiars’ main god. Another set of plinths lie directly inside, where family members might lounge, shaded from the midday sun. Sepia photos of ancestors, especially the patriarch, are arrayed in frames and hung so high up the walls they must be angled down to be admired. Beyond is a tennis-court-size open courtyard; in recent years families have installed metal grating above to ward off gangs of monkeys who wreck the rounded terra-cotta roof tiles in search of scraps of food the birds drop. The courtyard — with walls plastered in a unique silken lime-and-egg mixture — is ringed by a pillared, covered colonnade, often topped with a mezzanine. Off the colonnade there are dozens of cell-like rooms, traditionally stacked to the rafters with thousands of bowls, tureens and urns in steel, brass or colored enamel — dowry offerings handed down through generations. Every marriage adds to the inventory; the status is in the sheer volume.
What strikes you immediately, if you are used to the Western emphasis on upholstered sofas and chairs clustered for maximum conversation comfort and perhaps a cushy snooze, is that there is virtually no furniture. There’s also no privacy. Bedrolls are brought out at night to the interior thinnais, and the family sleeps together (“My children’s best memories are those times,” says Meyyappan, who in recent years has gotten herself a “proper, fixed bed, with a real mattress”); exquisite meals are traditionally served on the floor on banana leaves, and eaten with the delicately pinched-together fingers of the right hand, while in a crouch. “It keeps you limber,” Meyyappan says, conceding, however, that she herself has long given it up for a table and chairs. Despite the elegance of the houses, indoor plumbing came only in the 1940s. Meyyappan recalls coming back to live in her husband’s home after her marriage, as is traditional, and being surprised by a toilet; as a child in her family’s mansion next door, she recalls, “we just went out in the garden.”
The golden era of the Chettiars ended during World War II. The British had for years been angling to cut them out of the financial system of Southeast Asia, and the Japanese booted them from Burma when they invaded. With the economic system in shards, the frenzied building abruptly ceased, and most Chettiars left for Chennai, Mumbai, Singapore and the United States, starting businesses or entering medicine or law. There are now about 120,000 members of the clan in India and beyond.
And yet, even now, Chettiars — the young cosmopolites refer to themselves as “Chettys,” a great conversation starter over a star anise Manhattan at Aer, the bar atop the Four Seasons Mumbai — continue to see themselves as wholly of this place, forever, no matter where they actually live. In 2010, Krishna Chettiar, a silver-haired 90-year-old dressed daily in a meticulously pressed white kurta, was finally convinced to lease his family’s 60-room house to a small Tamil Nadu-based hotel company. They run it now, as Chidambara Vilas, 25 bedrooms luxuriously retrofitted with air conditioning and private baths. One of the few wealthy Chettiars who never left (“Let my daughters come from Chennai and visit,” he says, regally), he negotiated for the hotel company to retain a private annex for him out of part of the mansion’s endless ballroom — a room so long, he says, “that you couldn’t recognize a man standing at the other end.”
Betting that Chettinad has untapped tourist potential, the company would have loved to buy the place outright from him, making him one of the few Chettiars who could cash out permanently. They knew not to bother asking.
An earlier version of this article misidentified the state in India in which the hotel company that runs Chidambara Vilas is based. Sangam Hotels is in Tamil Nadu, not in Kerala.
Produced by Dheeraj Reddy. Travel production by Kamalan.
A version of this article appears in print on May 21, 2017, on Page M2150 of T Magazine with the headline: Curious Splendor.  Today's Paper|Subscribe


We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
See More »
Go to Home Page »