Advertisement

On Sports 
By                     
JAY CASPIAN KANG

JULY 25, 2017

As the sports world fell into the early days of its annual summer coma, a series of portentous moments were taking place. At a glance, and taken individually, they looked a lot like the peripheral or back-­office goings-on that typically fill the quieter months until football season starts. But by the time Lonzo Ball, the Lakers rookie point guard, whose passing ability is exceeded by only his father’s self-promotional thirst, lit up the N.B.A.’s summer league in Las Vegas in early July, a pattern was emerging. Beyond all the insiderish commentary about N.B.A. free agency and where Gordon Hayward, a borderline All Star, might end up, there was a steady stream of news that seemed to call into question the structure of labor and compensation in American professional sports.
It started on the first day of July, when Stephen Curry signed a five-year contract with the Golden State Warriors for just over $200 million. Over the course of Curry’s previous contract, his play and his anodyne charm helped increase the value of the Warriors to $2.6 billion, from a sales price of $450 million in 2010. When news of Curry’s deal came out, LeBron James, who has been the subject of studies on the economic impact a basketball player can have on a city’s economy, tweeted: ‘‘So tell me again why there’s a cap on how much a player should get?? Don’t answer that. Steph should be getting 400M this summer 5 yrs.’’
A few days later, Ball walked onto the court of a summer-league game wearing his family-designed, family-marketed Big Baller Brand sneakers. A couple nights after that, former N.B.A. players gathered in Charlotte to play in the BIG3, a three-on-three league, one of whose founders is Ice Cube, that will be crossing the country this summer.
Then, in mid-July, Leslie Alexander, the owner of the Houston Rockets, announced his team was for sale. The write-ups speculating on what the Rockets might fetch (more than a billion, easily) highlighted the fact that Houston had recently traded for Chris Paul, one of the league’s best players. The implication was clear: Paul and his new teammate James Harden, who signed a $169 million contract extension this summer, would be baked into the Rockets’ sales price.
Advertisement
While Ball was testing whether his sneakers could hold up to the rigors of an N.B.A. game, Floyd Mayweather, one of the canniest boxers ever, got together with the profane mixed-martial artist Conor McGregor to put on a high-energy, four-city car wreck of a promotion that skidded past pretty much every established standard of taste and competition. In late August, the two men will box each other in Las Vegas, a prize fight so devoid of competitive intrigue that even the most imaginative fight pundits have all but given up trying to figure out how McGregor is even going to lay a glove on Mayweather.
Boxing has had more near deaths than Fred Sanford, and after McGregor’s laughable training videos began to leak online — from a skills perspective, he looks like a Wall Streeter sorting out some rage issues — it seemed possible for a moment that this bout might finally be the indignity that causes the sport to keel over into its grave. But fights have their own economy, one that relies heavily on personality and self-promotion, and after Mayweather and McGregor finished their tour, it seemed likely that millions would chip in for the $89-to-$99 pay-per-view price to watch the bout, generating what many predict will be a nine-figure payday for Mayweather. Boxing is still the best con going, especially for the top fighters, who get a healthy portion of the gate and broadcast revenue. In what other big-time sport can an athlete reap so much of the money he generates? As recently as 2015, even after boxing has endured all manner of ailments — rampant corruption, fading superstars, utter indifference from the media — the two highest-paid athletes in the world were Mayweather and Manny Pacquiao, according to Forbes magazine.
Mayweather-size paydays might seem impossible in the N.B.A., given that more than a dozen players on each team all need their own paychecks. But back in the 2011 N.B.A. lockout, one prominent player, Amar’e Stoudemire, revealed that some players had discussed starting their own league. A handful of stars went on a barnstorming tour of local gyms and semipro tournaments, which in turn led many to ask why there was any need at all for the N.B.A. But labor eventually made big concessions, and when the games resumed, the players’ share of the money generated by basketball had been cut significantly. The N.B.A. was thriving; franchise valuations were skyrocketing and the league had a stable of young, marketable stars. And yet, thanks to some creative accounting that showed a few teams operating at a loss, the players had to limit what they could earn to ensure the financial health of their billionaire owners. No reasonable answer ever explained this away. But then a new television-rights deal (worth a reported $24 billion) raised the cap, player salaries went up and the talk of alternative basketball leagues fizzled out.
Advertisement
Now the expected rises in salary cap have leveled off — and small but significant grumblings like James’s tweet can be heard. The summer’s basketball developments are, to varying degrees, expressions of athletes’ power. BIG3 and Big Baller Brand might fail, but their very existence shows the possibilities for enterprising pros. We’ve now seen washed-up basketball players in the BIG3 sell 15,000 tickets in the Barclays Center in Brooklyn without a dollar going to the N.B.A. We’ve seen one of the most hyped and well-publicized rookies to enter the N.B.A. play in a shoe that will not contribute a single penny to the profits of Nike or Adidas. Developments like these allow athletes to start thinking more seriously about how they can leverage their influence to change the economics of professional sports.
In the past, when players pushed for significant changes in the name of safety, fair compensation or anything else, ‘‘tradition’’ got in the way. The N.F.L. season has to last at least 16 games, because that’s the way it has been for decades. N.B.A. teams have to play on back-to-back nights because that’s the only way to fit in all 82 games, a number set decades ago. Baseball’s drastic restrictions on what a player can make at the start of his career is just part of the sport’s accepted business model; so are unguaranteed contracts in the N.F.L. We accept that players in the N.B.A. and N.F.L. will be drafted and have little say about where they’ll go. We accept that leagues need to protect their owners from their worst spending impulses when it comes to answering the question why some 20-year-old superstar-in-the-making shouldn’t be paid whatever someone will pay him. The N.B.A.’s apparent philosophy is that if salaries were uncapped and the draft replaced by an auction system, average players would suffer because all the money would go to superstars and to exciting, yet ultimately unproven, prospects.
Why exactly should fans — or stars, who draw the majority of the attention — care what role players make? The Cavaliers and the Warriors have played in the last three N.B.A. finals. The source of the interest they generated wasn’t the history of those franchises. (How about that Brad Daugherty-Chris Mullin rivalry?) It was James and his All Stars versus Curry and his superteammates. Put them on any court and broadcast their games on any platform, and basketball fans will pay to watch. Sponsors and endorsements will quickly follow.
We assume that the major sports leagues have to stay in power because we can’t imagine a world without them. And when viewed entirely from a dollars standpoint, it’s hard to get too worked up over whether a team pays James $25 million or $100 million per season. But a new, truly player-driven league could also address other problems dogging the N.B.A.: the interminable regular season that causes players to take entire games off, the dilution of talent over 30 franchises, the ever-changing relationship with its supplier, the N.C.A.A., and the competitive imbalance in which only a handful of teams can contend for a championship.
In the six years since the N.B.A. lockout, fans have come to scrutinize players’ tweets, Instagram posts and vacation plans. Every above-average free agent becomes his own three-day news cycle. The league promotes this rabid attention as proof of its strength, but the players’ strength is mighty, too. Almost any reasonable iteration of a new league could work, as long as it has a handful of superstars.
Imagine a six-team league with franchises in New York, Las Vegas, Silicon Valley, Seattle, Austin, Tex., and Mexico City. Suppose Mark Zuckerberg gets onboard, streams the games on Facebook Live and persuades the best players in next year’s draft class to play for triple what they would make on their rookie deals, many of them playing in cities they hate. Whatever investment an owner would have to make in building out a roster would pale in comparison to the $2 billion Steve Ballmer spent to buy the Los Angeles Clippers. You know what’s cooler than owning a team? Owning a league.
Jay Caspian Kang is a writer at large for the magazine.
Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.
A version of this article appears in print on July 30, 2017, on Page MM14 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Should Superstar Athletes Make More Money and Run Their Leagues?.  Today's Paper|Subscribe


We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
See More »
Go to Home Page »