Advertisement
By NEIL GENZLINGERNOV. 10, 2017

Gilbert Rogin, who had an enviable run as a writer of droll short fiction for The New Yorker while building toward an impressive career as a top editor at Sports Illustrated and other magazines, died on Nov. 4 at his home in Westport, Conn. He was 87.
His death was confirmed by his wife, Jacqueline Duvoisin, a former photographer for Sports Illustrated. She did not specify the cause, but Mr. Rogin had been in declining health for years.
Talented and idiosyncratic, Mr. Rogin was managing editor of Sports Illustrated for five years beginning in 1979, a stretch when the magazine was still dominant in sports journalism and ESPN was just a fledgling.
Before that, though, it seemed as if he might be on his way to a career as a fiction writer. The New Yorker published more than 30 of his stories beginning in 1963, humorous tales that often seemed at least somewhat autobiographical, and he had written several well-received books. But in 1980 Roger Angell, the magazine’s fiction editor, rejected one of his submissions on the grounds — as Mr. Rogin later told the tale — that he was repeating himself. He stopped writing fiction entirely.
Advertisement
“Maybe I knew I’d exhausted the fiction vein,” he told Franz Lidz, one of his former Sports Illustrated reporters, in a 2010 interview for AARP the Magazine. “The idea had always been in the back of my mind. For whatever reason, after Roger voiced that opinion, I literally couldn’t write fiction again. Not a single word.”
Advertisement
Gilbert Leslie Rogin was born on Nov. 14, 1929, in Brooklyn. His father, Robert, was a lawyer. His mother, the former Lillian Ruderman, had been an actress who, under the name Billie Rudell, made several Broadway appearances in the 1920s.
Mr. Rogin grew up in Manhattan and graduated from Columbia College. In 1951 he began a brief stint at The New Yorker as an office gofer; his assignment on his second day on the job was to bring a suit of clothes to a funeral home for Harold Ross to be laid out in. Mr. Ross, the magazine’s founding editor, had just died.
In 1955, after two years in the Army, Mr. Rogin joined Sports Illustrated, which Time Inc. had begun the year before. His job was to clip articles from newspapers and the wire services for filing in the magazine’s library, but he began writing almost immediately, and soon was a reporter.
He became known for elegant phrasing and carefully observed profiles of figures like the boxer Floyd Patterson and the basketball star Bill Russell. In 2014, when the magazine commemorated its 60th anniversary by republishing 60 of its best articles, one by Mr. Rogin was among them: “12 Days Before the Mast,” his account of participating in a sailing race from California to Hawaii aboard a 55-foot yawl. Not a sailing fan, he found the experience underwhelming.
“It was a numbing, embittering and largely useless 12 days,” he wrote. “There was no plot, no suspense. Our progress was as lacking in memorable incident as the passage of an hour hand across the face of a clock. We proved only that a curving, erratic line is not the shortest distance between two points.”
When not on assignment for Sports Illustrated, Mr. Rogin began writing short fiction. The New Yorker published its first Rogin story, “Ernest Observes,” in 1963, and they came regularly after that, right up through “The Hard Parts” in November 1978. More appeared in other magazines.
A story collection, “The Fencing Master,” came out in 1965, and in 1971 Mr. Rogin published his first novel, “What Happens Next?” The poet L. E. Sissman, reviewing that book in The New York Times, called it “a novel of the first importance.”
Advertisement
A second novel, “Preparations for the Ascent,” thematically related to the first, came in 1980. In 2010 the two novels were reissued by Verse Chorus Press as a single volume. Jay Jennings, in the introduction to that republication, wrote of the similarities that run through much of Mr. Rogin’s funny, understated fiction.
“The protagonist,” Mr. Jennings wrote, “no matter the name, is a (presumably autobiographical) middle-aged, Jewish, Manhattanite male, a magazine writer of eclectic intellectual interests and eccentric habits.”
As to why Mr. Rogin’s fiction, whose admirers included John Updike, had been largely forgotten, Mr. Jennings speculated that oversaturation might have played a part.
“He was writing at the very apex of the market for protagonists who were middle-aged, Jewish, Manhattanite male intellectuals/writers and musers,” Mr. Jennings wrote. “The ur-text in this genre is Saul Bellow’s ‘Herzog’ (1964), with cohorts Mailer, Malamud and others doing variations on the theme.”
It also certainly did not help that Mr. Rogin abruptly abandoned fiction. The story that drew the discouraging New Yorker rejection back in 1980, “My Masterpieces,” did eventually see the light of print, in 2010, when The Lowbrow Reader published it. (It appears in the anthology “The Lowbrow Reader Reader” as well.) The magazine also arranged for a Mr. Rogin to do a reading at an event at the Housing Works Bookstore in SoHo.
“Gil was accustomed to the upper echelon of publishing — The New Yorker and whatnot — and here he was, publishing his lost masterpiece in some idiot’s comedy zine,” Jay Ruttenberg, editor of The Lowbrow Reader, who joined with Mr. Jennings in getting Mr. Rogin’s novels republished, said in an email. “But he was genuinely appreciative of our efforts and visibly delighted by the attention.”
Mr. Rogin’s shift away from fiction coincided with his rise to the top editing spot at Sports Illustrated, where his eccentric style alienated some writers — Dan Jenkins was one — but was embraced by others.
“He’d make his changes with a touch so light that you could only nod appreciatively,” Jerry Kirshenbaum, a writer and editor at the magazine for 30 years, wrote in an email. “You didn’t feel like your fingers were being chopped off the way it was with some other editors. With Gil, it was like having a manicure.”
Advertisement
Yet there could also be bellowing and red-penciled rage, and savvy staff members learned that Mr. Rogin was a man of sometimes strange routines that were not to be disrupted.
“Between 2 and 3, everybody had to be silent while he took his nap,” Mr. Lidz said in an interview. Breakfast was always Bumble Bee tuna eaten from the can. He would often edit in the bathroom adjacent to his office. When he traveled, his assistant had to be sure not only that the hotel had a pool but that it was suitable for Mr. Rogin to swim his daily laps in — no kidney shapes allowed.
An oft-told tale: Once, on the road, Mr. Rogin turned up for his swim to find that the hotel pool was being drained; he frantically swam his mile’s worth of laps anyway, racing the declining water level.
Mr. Rogin married Ruth Copes in 1963. That marriage ended in divorce. He is survived by his wife, with whom he had a relationship of more than 30 years; they married in 2010.
His oddities aside, Mr. Rogin was adept and versatile enough that, in 1984, Time moved him — despite his reluctance — to Discover, its struggling science magazine, which he helped stabilize. In 1986 it won a National Magazine Award for general excellence. In 1987 Mr. Rogin became corporate editor, the No. 3 editing position in the Time Inc. empire.
In that capacity, he helped Quincy Jones found Vibe magazine in 1993. And his volatile impatience seemed to grow.
“He felt that the guilty should be shot,” Jason McManus, who as editor in chief was his boss, said on the occasion of Mr. Rogin’s retirement in 1993. “I often made him unhappy by my reluctance to take summary action on some perceived outrage; on the other hand, if I instantly had taken Gil’s advice, hardly any of our present managing editors would still be employed, nor would I.”
A version of this article appears in print on November 12, 2017, on Page A29 of the New York edition with the headline: Gilbert Rogin, Writer and Magazine Editor, Dies at 87.  Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe


We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Go to Home Page »