Advertisement


      By DEB AMLEN

APRIL 19, 2017


Learning to recognize a few names from the world of sports and how they might be clued will help you with your crossword-solving. Use this print-and-save list of famous sports figures who are frequently seen in crosswords to help take your puzzling to the next level.

We’re here to help you solve. What topics are on your list of crossword-solving weaknesses?
This new Wordplay series takes a look at topics you might be fuzzy on that come up frequently in crossword puzzles, so that the next time you wonder which Mel the puzzle is referring to when you see the clue “Hall-of-Famer Mel” (it’s Mel OTT), you’ll be able to fill it in with confidence.
We’ll also show you ways these names might be clued, so you’ll be able to recognize them the next time they come up.
The Alous you need to know for crosswords are the brothers Felipe, Matty, Jesus, as well as Moises (Felipe’s son), although outside the United States, they are not known as Alou. In fact, in their native Dominican Republic, they are known by the surname Rojas. In keeping with Latin custom, the family’s full name includes both their father’s surname (Rojas) and that of their mother (Alou). However, because of a misunderstanding early in Felipe’s career, his United States managers incorrectly called him Felipe Alou. When his brothers began their pro careers, they used their matronym as well.
In one baseball myth, it was thought that Felipe, Jesus and Matty were the only three brothers to start together in the outfield in a major-league game. However, while they played together in the outfield in three games, they were not all in the starting lineup.
Related: “The Myth of the Alou Brothers”
Sources: Baseball-reference.com, XWordInfo.com
Whether Alex “A-Rod” Rodriguez is one of your baseball heroes for being an award-winning, record-setter for grand slams or you no longer look at him through rose-colored glasses because of his involvement with performance-enhancing drugs, knowing his nickname, “A-Rod,” and a few ways that you might see that entry clued will help your solving. A-ROD has appeared in The New York Times Crossword 72 times. 
Fun Fact: The name “Biogenesis” in some clues refers to the now-defunct Biogenesis of America Inc. clinic that supplied Major League Baseball players with performance-enhancing drugs, or steroids. 
 
Related: “Exchanging Sword for Pen, Rodriguez Apologizes to Yankees and Fans”
Sources: ESPN.com, Mlb.com, Usatoday.com, XWordInfo.com
Arthur Ashe was the king of “firsts” in the tennis world: the first African-American man to be recruited by the United States Davis Cup team, the first African-American man to win the United States Open and Wimbledon, and the first African-American man to be ranked No. 1 in tennis in the world. 
Later in life, after he went public about contracting H.I.V. after a blood transfusion, Mr. Ashe became an activist who worked to raise awareness of the disease at a time when it wasn’t frequently discussed. About his activism, he said, “True heroism is remarkably sober; very undramatic. It is not the urge to surpass all others at whatever cost, but the urge to serve others at whatever cost.” 
Related: Arthur Ashe, Pathbreaker: From Wimbledon to Richmond, and Back
Sources: Biography.com, XWordInfo.com
The golfer Ernie Els’s last name appears frequently in crosswords because it’s short and uses common letters, making him a useful entry for puzzle makers.
Mr. Els was born in Johannesburg and began playing golf at age 9. He has 70 professional career victories, having won tournaments in South Africa, Europe, the United States, Asia, the Far East, the Middle East and Australasia.
In addition to his 19 P.G.A. Tour victories, Mr. Els is also known for his charitable endeavors, which include the Els for Autism Foundation, inspired by his son Ben, as well as for establishing the Ernie Els Invitational in South Africa, which raises money for a multitude of charities.
Related: Ernie Els’s Inner Voice Was Quieted When His Son Was Slow to Speak
Sources: Ernieels.com, Pgatour.com, XWordInfo.com
The surname of hockey legend Bobby Orr, like that of golfer Ernie Els, is also a useful short entry for puzzle makers.
However, hockey fans might argue that Mr. Orr appears frequently because his speed, scoring and play-making abilities revolutionized his position in defense. Mr. Orr played professionally in the National Hockey League for 12 seasons, starting with 10 seasons with the Boston Bruins, followed by two seasons with the Chicago Blackhawks.Today, Mr. Orr is a player agent and president of the Orr Hockey Group Agency.
Related: The Story Behind Hockey’s Most Famous Photo
Sources: Bobbyorr.com, Deadspin.com, XWordInfo.com
Add Mel “Master Melvin” Ott to your growing list of short and useful sports names to know. Mr. Ott played professionally in Major League Baseball as a right fielder for the New York Giants from 1926 through 1947 and has been in The New York Times Crossword more than 400 times.
Compact in stature and using an unorthodox left-handed swing, in which he lifted his right foot just before he brought his bat around, Mr. Ott used the short 257-foot right-field porch at the Polo Grounds as his personal playground — hitting 323 of his then-National League-record 511 homers at the park.
He was also one of the most beloved players for his time, with Hall of Fame Coach Leo Durocher remarking, “I never knew a baseball player who was so universally loved. Why, even when he was playing against the Dodgers at Ebbets Field, he would be cheered, and there are no more rabid fans than in Brooklyn.”
Related: Where Ott and Orr are Most Valuable: 15 Across, or Maybe 7 Down
Sources: Baseballhall.org, XWordInfo.com
Puzzle makers love an entry that follows a consonant-vowel-consonant-vowel pattern because it can fit into a grid nearly anywhere. They love it even more when the letter S is involved, because that can turn a recalcitrant entry into a plural.
Samuel “Sammy” Kelvin Peralta Sosa rose from great poverty in the Dominican Republic to play Major League Baseball for four teams, most notably as the M.V.P. for the Chicago Cubs in 1988. Mr. Sosa, with Mark McGwire, broke the single-season home run record in 1998 and they were named Sportsmen of the Year by both Sports Illustrated and The Sporting News.In 2009, it was disclosed that both Mr. Sosa and Mr. McGwire tested positive for performance-enhancing drugs in 2003 during a routine drug test. Although Mr. Sosa denied using them, the allegations were a large part of why he is falling dangerously close to being voted off the Baseball Hall of Fame ballot.
Related: Sosa is Said to Have Tested Positive in 2003
Sources: Mlb.com, SportsIllustrated.com, NYTimes.com, XWordInfo.com
Edson Arantes do Nascimento was born in Três Corações, Brazil, in 1940 and scored the first professional goal of his career before he turned 16. Pelé, who earned his nickname as a child, was signed to a professional league when he was 15 years old.
Pelé was officially introduced to the world during the 1958 World Cup in Sweden. The 17-year-old amazed the crowd with his speed, athleticism and field vision to score three goals in a semifinal against France. During his career, he went on to play for Brazil and win two additional World Cups.
Pelé’s legend was such that, according to Biography.com, “In the late 1960s, the two factions in the Nigerian civil war reportedly agreed to a 48-hour cease-fire so they could watch Pelé play in an exhibition game in Lagos.”
He retired in 1974, but was lured out of retirement the following year to play for the New York Cosmos in the North American Soccer League. Off the field, Pelé was awarded the International Peace Award for his work with UNICEF. He has also served as Brazil’s Extraordinary Minister for Sport and a United Nations ambassador for ecology and the environment.
Pelé was named FIFA’s “Co-Player of the Century” in 1999, along with Argentine Diego Maradona.
Related: Pelé Remains the Last Word in a Changing World
Sources: Biography.com, XWordInfo.com
There are names in sports that are more famous, but baseball player Tris Speaker’s popularity in crosswords stems from the fact that his surname can be used in clues as a synonym of “orator” and his first name makes a good entry because it is short and made up of common letters. As a result, Mr. Speaker can be found in The New York Times Crossword more than 130 times, often clued as something like “Speaker in the Hall of Fame.”
Mr. Speaker, nicknamed “The Grey Eagle,” was a friendly rival of Ty Cobb as the greatest outfielder of the Deadball Era. While the Georgia Peach outperformed Mr. Speaker as a batter, Speaker led the American League in putouts seven times and in double plays six times in a 22-year career with Boston, Cleveland, Washington, and Philadelphia. His career totals in both categories are still major-league records at his position.
Interesting historical side note: Mr. Speaker taught cowboy humorist Will Rogers how to use a lariat.
Sources: Sabr.org, Baseball-Almanac.com, XWordInfo.com
Basketball player Yao Ming played for the Shanghai Sharks of the Chinese Basketball Association (1997-2002) and the N.B.A.’s Houston Rockets (2002-2009, 2010-2011). His surname, a matter of confusion through his career, has appeared in The New York Times Crossword 40 times most likely because of the double vowel, which can be tricky for Western solvers.
Mr. Yao’s surname was something that stumped both fans and his teammates when he was signed to the Rockets. In East Asian culture, the name order is family or surname first, given name last, and, in Western culture, it’s the other way around. Mr. Yao claims that during his career, teammates called him Yao as a way to welcome him, thinking that it was his first name and would make him feel comfortable. He was too shy to correct them. In addition, fans who were unfamiliar with the Asian name convention wondered why his “first” name, Yao, was on his jersey, unlike other basketball players. 
After retiring in 2011 because of injuries, Mr. Yao has participated in numerous charitable events, became a spokesman for several products and helped the N.B.A. with international outreach.
Related: Ever Loyal, Yao Risks His Career
Sources: Nydailynews.com, Britannica.com, XWordInfo.com
Advertisement