Advertisement
By THE ASSOCIATED PRESSAPRIL 20, 2018, 6:34 P.M. E.D.T.

MINNEAPOLIS —  The first taste of the NBA playoffs for Timberwolves All-Star Karl-Anthony Towns has been rather bitter, thanks to the 3-point-happy Houston Rockets.
The two-game totals tell a frustrating story for the 22-year-old: just 13 points, 5 for 18 shooting and a 2-0 deficit in the series against the Rockets. Towns has found himself the subject of pointed criticism from analysts, fans and even his own team.
The switch-heavy Rockets have double-teamed Towns to a stifling effect, and the Timberwolves sure haven't helped their 7-footer out by getting him the ball in favorable situations in the post.
"They're coming to double. He knows that. He has to face up, be strong with the ball, make quick moves," point guard Jeff Teague said. "But we have to figure out how to get him running, get him some easy buckets."
Advertisement
The team's struggles have taken a little luster off Minnesota's first postseason home game in 14 years, but the fans who remember the Timberwolves reaching the Western Conference finals in 2004 will surely be eager to witness the playoffs in person no matter the daunting challenge in this first round.
Advertisement
"This organization, all of our fans, they deserve this moment," Towns said.
And they want a win.
The Timberwolves host the Rockets on Saturday night in Game 3. Earlier in the day, Miami takes on Philadelphia in the Eastern Conference and New Orleans hosts Portland, both in Game 4. Later, Utah visits Oklahoma City in Game 3.
Towns tried his best to shrug off the bad vibes and stinging rebukes when speaking with reporters on Friday.
"You dwell too much on the past, you forget that you've got to take care of the present," Towns said.
The chatter on TV and Twitter, he said, has escaped him.
"I live my life very Amish-like," Towns said. "Other than video games, I don't think I have a reason for electronics. It's a life that I've always loved."
___
76ERS AT HEAT
76ers lead 2-1. Game 4, 2:30 p.m. EDT, TNT
NEED TO KNOW: It's simple: The team that has imposed its will is 3-0 in this series. Philadelphia took the pace where it wanted it in Games 1 and 3. Miami out-toughed the 76ers in Game 2. The Heat have to find a way to keep Philadelphia's 3-point shooting in check; the 76ers made 18 shots from beyond the arc in Game 3. Joel Embiid is back from a concussion and a broken bone around his eye, and an already-confident Philadelphia bunch seems to have even more swagger now.
KEEP AN EYE ON: 76ers guard Marco Belinelli. The 76ers are 25-6 when he plays and 14-1 when he scores at least 15 points. In this series, he's 13 for 27 on shots from 20 feet and deeper, and many of those makes have been daggers for Miami.
PRESSURE IS ON: Heat center Hassan Whiteside . Backups Kelly Olynyk and Bam Adebayo have played a combined 145 minutes in this series, while Whiteside has played only 41, with 11 points, nine fouls, seven turnovers and three field goals in the three games. There's no room for error now for Miami, so either Whiteside will figure it out fast in Game 4 or the Heat will get someone else into his spot.
Advertisement
HISTORY LESSON: This is the fourth time in Dwyane Wade's career that the Heat have trailed an Eastern Conference opponent 2-1. In the three previous Game 4s in that scenario, Miami has won all three with Wade averaging 26.7 points in those second-round games against Indiana (2004 and 2012) and Toronto (2016).
___
TRAIL BLAZERS AT PELICANS
Pelicans lead 3-0. Game 4, 5 p.m. EDT, TNT.
NEED TO KNOW: The sixth-seeded Pelicans are on the cusp of a surprising sweep of the third-seeded Blazers, and their margin of victory has grown in each game. They dominated Game 3, leading by as many as 20 points in the first half and 33 in the second. Veteran guard Rajon Rondo has masterfully run the offense, and the Pelicans have played unselfishly with a different scoring leader in each game: Anthony Davis with 35 in Game 1, Jrue Holiday with 33 in Game 2 and Nikola Mirotic with 30 in Game 3.
Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.
Invalid email address. Please re-enter.
You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.
View all New York Times newsletters.
KEEP AN EYE ON: Portland's body language, intensity and aggressiveness. Guard Damian Lillard challenged the Blazers to ramp up those aspects of their game, stressing that the Pelicans were "a lot more aggressive than we were and we didn't dish it back out. I think in the playoffs and in a situation like this, when a team is coming for you like that, you've got to maybe go out of your way to do it back, even if that means foul trouble or some altercations happen out there."
PRESSURE IS ON: Lillard. The Pelicans have sold out to stop the Portland star, who missed nine of 14 shots in Game 3. "It's either going to be a tough shot, or I've got to give the ball up," Lillard said. "I've got to trust making the right play, and when it comes time I've got to take my chances and I've got to take those tough shots."
INJURY UPDATE: Blazers starting forward Evan Turner missed Game 3 because of a toe injury in Game 2. The team did not update his status on Friday.
___
ROCKETS AT TIMBERWOLVES
Rockets lead 2-0. Game 3, 7:30 p.m. EDT, ESPN.
NEED TO KNOW: The Rockets cruised to a 20-point victory in Game 2 despite only 12 points on a staggering 2-for-18 shooting performance by James Harden. After squandering their chance to steal Game 1 on the road in a three-point loss, the Wolves are back home in a big hole against the team with the best record in the NBA. They'll need a big boost from a home crowd celebrating the team's return to the postseason to send the series back to Houston for a Game 5.
KEEP AN EYE ON: Gerald Green. The 32-year-old journeyman, once acquired by the Wolves in the franchise-altering 2007 trade that sent Kevin Garnett to Boston, made five 3-pointers in Game 2 for postseason career-high 21 points.
PRESSURE IS ON: Timberwolves coach Tom Thibodeau. Though cornerstones Towns and Andrew Wiggins are getting their first taste of postseason, Thibodeau and veterans Jimmy Butler, Jamal Crawford, Taj Gibson and Teague he brought in last summer have plenty of playoff experience. The Wolves have been largely directionless on offense against the Rockets and their underrated defense.
INJURY UPDATE: Rockets forward Ryan Anderson, who has sat out the first two games with a sprained ankle, is likely to play in Game 3. Forward Luc Mbah a Moute, who dislocated his shoulder in the second-to-last game of the regular season, said this week he wouldn't rule out a return in this series.
Advertisement
___
THUNDER AT JAZZ
Series tied 1-1. Game 3, 10 p.m. EDT, ESPN.
NEED TO KNOW: In the first two games, the higher-rebounding team has been the winning team, with Game 1 going to Oklahoma City and Utah taking Game 2. A critical part of this trend will be Thunder center Steven Adams and his presence on the floor. He played just 22 minutes in Game 2 before fouling out. The Thunder will have to do better against Utah center Rudy Gobert and forward Derrick Favors, who combined for 31 rebounds in Game 2.
KEEP AN EYE ON: Russell Westbrook. He has taken a secondary role at times in this series, but that might change. With Oklahoma City's inability to close in Game 2 after leading in the fourth quarter, Westbrook could look to be more of a scorer in Game 3. He'll need more help from Carmelo Anthony, who has made just 11 of 31 field goals in the series.
PRESSURE IS ON: George. The man who called himself "Playoff P" before the series began came out with 36 points and eight 3-pointers in the opener. He followed that with a dud, just 18 points on 6 for 21 shooting.
INTRIGUING MATCHUP: Jazz guard Donovan Mitchell vs. Thunder guard Corey Brewer. Mitchell used his speed to slice through the Thunder defense for 13 of his 28 points in the fourth quarter of Game 2 . He was essentially unstoppable once he decided to stop shooting 3-pointers. The Thunder could be forced to put George on him more if Brewer struggles defensively again.
___
AP Basketball Writer Tim Reynolds in Miami and AP Sports Writers Cliff Brunt in Oklahoma City and Brett Martel in New Orleans contributed to this report.
___
For more AP NBA coverage: https://apnews.com/tag/NBAbasketball
We’re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think.
Go to Home Page »